

SD:
This episode is brought to you by Rhino Skin Solutions, my go-to when it comes to taking care of my skin.
I've been using the performance cream to keep my skin dry here in Tensleep, where I'm climbing
right now.
It's oscillating between being kind of warm and being cold and rainy, and the dry cream really helps me keep my skin dry on those humid days.
I've been using the repair cream in the evenings to help my skin heal faster between sport climbing sessions, and this is exactly why Rhino Skin Solutions is so amazing.
Whether you have dry, glassy skin or sweaty skin, and have trouble keeping chalk on your hands like I do, Rhino Skin Solutions has products that are designed just for you and your skin type.
Check out my episode with founder Justin Brown, episode 22 of The Nugget, still an amazing episode, to learn more about which products are right for you and how to dial in your skin for an upcoming climbing trip or performance season.
That's a super valuable episode if you want to try Rhino products.
If you want to level up your skin game, head over to rhinoskinsolutions.com and enter code NUGGET at checkout for 20% off your next order.
That's rhinoskinsolutions.com.
Use code NUGGET at checkout for 20% off and start taking better care of your skin today.
This episode is also brought to you by Arcteryx.
When Jordan Cannon, a young climber infatuated with climbing history, meets climbing legend Mark Hudon, a Yosemite Big Wall free-climbing pioneer, they form an unlikely partnership around a common goal.
Jordan wants to free-climb the Free Rider on El Cap in a day, and Mark hopes to free the route in as many days as it takes and accomplish his lifelong goal of free-climbing El Capitan.
Follow their story in Free As Can Be, a short climbing film brought to you by Arcteryx.
I watched the film about a month ago.
It's 31 minutes long.
It's so well done.
It's a story of climbing partnership and adventure, and if you love this podcast, and especially if you loved my episode with Jordan Cannon, episode 115, one of my favorites, then I know you'll love the film.
So check it out.
Head over to YouTube and search for Arcteryx Free As Can Be, or use the direct link right there in your podcast app to watch the full 31-minute film for free.
Once again, you can head over to YouTube and search for Arcteryx Free As Can Be, or use the direct link right there in your podcast app to watch the full 31-minute film for free.
Arcteryx presents Free As Can Be, and we hope you enjoy the film.
And finally, this episode is brought to you by Grasshopper Climbing.
I have tried all of the training boards on the market.
I love them all, but the Grasshopper board is my favorite.
I cannot wait to buy a house or a property someday just so I can own one of these so I can train on it every day.
Why is it my favorite?
Well, first off, they got the basics right.
You can actually warm up on the board, which is super critical if you're thinking about putting a board in your garage, and that's all you have to train on.
The LED lights are in the right spot and are easy to see when you're climbing, and the wall angle is easy to adjust.
Those three things already set the Grasshopper board apart.
But more than that, I absolutely love their hold set.
As soon as I climbed on the board, I could tell the folks at Grasshopper put a ton of thought into the hold shapes and the layout.
The layout is also mirrored, which I love.
It's really cool to try a boulder problem and then flip it around in the app and see if it feels different climbing it the other way around.
I think that's a great diagnostic tool, and I love that if I find a cool boulder problem in the app, I immediately have two to work on that are equally good because I can just flip it around and climb the mirrored boulder problem.
Anyway, that's why I love the Grasshopper board, but as always, don't take my word for it.
The folks at Grasshopper just want you to try it out for yourself.
Be sure to check them out on Instagram at grasshopperclimbing if you want to see the board in action, and you can visit their brand new website at grasshopperclimbing.com to learn more and contact their sales team to find out where you can go try a board and to find out which board solution might be right for you.
And if you're ready to pull the trigger on a Grasshopper board, the folks at Grasshopper are offering you guys, listeners to this podcast, $500 off when you order a fully kitted out 8x10 foot board.
That's their smallest board, and you can save even more money if you upgrade to a larger board.
Just tell them I sent you or that you learned about the Grasshopper board from the Nugget podcast and they'll hook it up and save you hundreds of dollars.
That's like three pairs of climbing shoes you can save just for listening to this podcast.
Once again, you can check them out on Instagram at grasshopperclimbing or at their website grasshopperclimbing.com and be sure to tell them I sent you.





Hello friends.
Welcome to another episode of the Nugget Climbing Podcast.
This is your host, Stephen Dimmitt, as always.
And my guest today is Dan Varian.
If you recognize that name, that's because Dan has been mentioned on the podcast a couple times.
Dan is the co-founder of Beastmaker, the company that he started along with Ned Feehally, making some of the most popular hangboards in the world.
I'm sure you've seen the Beastmaker hangboards.
And if you enjoyed my episode with Ned, I'm sure you'll love this conversation with Dan as well.
These guys started a hangboard company because they are total geeks about finger training, and that really comes through in this conversation.
This is probably the geekiest conversation I've ever had on the podcast about finger training.
I found it super useful.
And if you're a geek like me, you'll love this one.
If you're sick of hearing about finger training, you can probably skip this one.
That's okay.
It's not for everybody.
But yeah, Dan's amazing.
He's also an incredibly high level boulderer himself.
He's incredibly accomplished.
I talk about some of his accomplishments in the start of the episode, so I won't cover them too much here.
But this guy does it all when it comes to bouldering.
He's put up tons of hard first ascents, really impressive, scary highballs, you name it.
He's really, really well-rounded and really consistent with his bouldering, and he knows what he's talking about.
He also spent a bunch of years coaching Aiden Roberts, who is an up-and-coming crusher from the UK, one of the strongest boulderers in the world.
And we talked about some of the things that Dan has now learned from Aiden in this conversation.
But the bulk of this conversation was actually about a finger strength test that Dan had me do before doing this interview.
Dan had me test every single one of my fingers individually in both a full crimped position and an open hand position using a sling and lifting weights off the floor one finger at a time.
I did that a couple of weeks before doing this interview, sent Dan the results, and then that's a lot of what we talked about.
His takeaways from my results, the implications for me, and his recommendations for me.
He found that I have two lazy fingers, and so we talked a lot about how to activate lazy fingers that aren't contributing to your grip.
So even though this was specific to me, if you're a geek about finger training and you're frustrated or struggling with your finger strength training, I think you'll find something really useful in this conversation.
And that reminds me, Dan was also mentioned in the Neil Gresham interview.
Dan is the guy that helped Neil Gresham discover some of the weaknesses in his own finger strength and helped him correct them and to work on his half crimp and eventually get that to be balanced with his other grips.
That's something that Neil and I talked about in that interview, and Dan is the guy that helped him.
So yeah, a super geeky deep dive into finger training in this conversation.
We jumped around, covered a couple other topics, but that was the meat of it.
And with that, I think we'll dive in.
Please enjoy this deep dive into all things finger training with Dan Varian.



SD: How's it going, man?
DV: Yeah, good.
SD: Good. You're in a different spot than last time.
DV: Oh, no.
SD: Oh, never mind. Nice. Oh, that's a very comfy-looking couch to have in your training room. That's great.
DV: Yeah, we just shuffle all the cushions about, just the girls make tunnels out of them and play around.
And yeah, you can just like modular room, isn't it? Yeah. Keep it comfy. But I've just been on the fingerboard and stuff just to try and get some references.
SD: Awesome. I love it. Man, what a great room. I also think it's really funny that you don't have any sort of, like you just have a pile of couch cushions on the floor for your crash mats. I think that's pretty, pretty funny given like how long you've been doing this.
DV: Oh, it's sticking with that kind of British out the skip spirit there. They're all like leftovers. When we moved into this house, we got left two sofas, so I just took all the cushions in there.
The main thing where we've kept them is like I've got a full-size gym mat in the garage still. But yeah, these work really well just being able to move to one side, do some stuff on the floor, and all pile up and make dens. You know, you can't make a den out of a full, if you get a proper bouldering mat in. Think about the kids.
SD: I love it. That's awesome.
DV: I prefer making dens and crawling through tunnels nowadays.
SD: Versus climbing?
DV: Then actually using the board for training.
SD: I love it. That's awesome, man. It's good to see you again. I have been very excited about this because I think it promises to be a very valuable conversation for me in particular. And hopefully a lot of, you know, everyone else listening to this gets something out of it too.
But yeah, it's good to see you. How are you doing?
DV: Yeah, good. Yeah, I thought it would just be something fun. And actually, yeah, I'm really interested to chat about the test you did. And yeah, hopefully it'll be insightful for you, but other people can just sort of vicariously
bounce off it and think, oh, that resonates. Or maybe they just think I'm full of rubbish.
SD: Yeah, well, let's talk about that. I mean, I think they'll have a hard time thinking you're full of rubbish after they know a little bit about your resume. And I want to take a few minutes just to kind of create the context for this conversation, even though we're going to talk about something really specific here. Actually, I have no idea where this is going to go. I have enough notes in front of me, Dan, to probably talk for about four hours.
So we'll see what happens. I don't want to...
DV: Dan Bennett's time.
SD: Totally. Yeah, I'm already thinking we're going to have to do a couple of these. But you made it easy for me.
We talked for a couple hours a few weeks ago, and you were so interested in this one specific part of your own training that you've been focusing on, things that you've learned from working with Aidan Roberts and observed from him and how that's influenced your own climbing. And so you gave me this finger test to do, and I'm so excited.
I did the test. I sent you the results. I'm so excited to geek out because we haven't really talked about it yet.
But I want to take a few minutes just to give people a little bit of background. I almost get intimidated or it's almost difficult to prepare for an interview with someone like you because there's so many things we could talk about.
We could have had a two-hour conversation about first ascents and your process for finding boulders and developing.
We could have talked about your mindset for highballs because you've done some really difficult, really scary Font style stuff way off the deck.
Correct me if I'm wrong, but I believe you've done like 200 first ascents, 8a and harder. Is that right?
DV: Yeah, thereabouts. I stopped counting exactly a while ago. I'd have to add them up, but it'll be about there.
SD: That's amazing, man. So for Americans listening, V11 or harder, Dan's done 200 plus roughly first ascents,
V11 and harder, which is just amazing. And then you also... Go ahead.
DV: They're all in these very black quarters no one cares about how much rock there is in the world.
SD: Yeah. Well, I mean, it's super impressive nonetheless. And I bring that up, I mean, to give you credibility, but also just to provide some context because this is probably going to be the most geeky finger training conversation I've ever had on the podcast, which is saying something. I've done a lot of these.
But just knowing that you have the rock experience and that you've devoted so much time to rock, you also started Beastmaker with Ned Feehally and have one of the most popular hangboard companies in the world.
All that to say, we could be talking about so many things and we could be talking about your tactics and your bouldering strategy and things like that. So let's start with Aiden Roberts, actually. I think that'd be a really interesting place to start. I want you to tell me a little bit about who Aiden is for people that don't know and what
your connection to him is. And what was it that you started to notice about his climbing and specifically the way
that he uses his fingers when crimping that made this whole conversation and this topic so interesting to you?
DV: All right. I guess with the finger training, I did a little bit of it before I met Aiden. It just really helped unravel our differences. And I sort of solidified it with him and other people up in Cumbria, because I've moved
away. A bit of geography background. I did live in Sheffield for quite a few years, six years.
And I met my wife and we moved further north back to nearer where we both grew up, which is in the north of England where no one lives comparatively, compared to the south. But there's a lot of rock up here. So it's good fun.
And luckily for me, there's still lots of keen rock climbers out here. And Aiden was one of those climbers I met when he was really young. He was like 14, I think, when I first met him.
SD: How old is he now?
DV: Oh, a question. I think Aiden is 23 now.
SD: Okay. And how old are you, Dan?
DV: 35.
SD: 35. Okay. 
DV: Getting there.
SD: I'm 33. So same range. Still getting better, though. And it sounds like you are too. So yeah, plenty of hard climbing ahead.
DV: Yeah. I'm just fighting the decline, mate, with the kids. But I'm having to get smarter and a lot of this feeds into, they all tie together. So I've got less time nowadays. So I'm having to zone in on things.
And with the little time that I have now, it's fun trying to play the training game. Because actually, I've been in the position in my early 20s after uni where I had all the week to lay out my training and do tons of stuff.
And back in the mid 2000s and early 2000s, putting up hard stuff around Sheffield, I was in that position.
And now I'm in the position where I'm lucky if I get an hour and a half after the kids are in bed before I'm too tired.
And I get like a day on the weekend, but I'd like to go out that day. So it has to be raining, really. So yeah, it's changed over the years, but I'm zoning in. So to keep it on track. With kind of like the finger mapping, essentially, I'm always in favor of detail over vagueness, because it sets you off. And the reason why I wanted to just kind of, because obviously your podcast is training related, but what I like is it also seems to follow a little bit of your own journey through climbing. And like you speak to guests, and then you go away and you try stuff and see if it works.
And I like that process, because that fits my kind of own anecdotal, you know, you just sort of tinker and see what works for you. It's not everybody's advice.
You know, we all do things similarly, but also different enough to create those differences that mean we're not all on camp sport day in, day out, and we're not all doing four by fours and things like that.
And there's enough variance in the niche to create like quite different athletes.
And that's something Ned said in his book really well is, you know, if we all had the perfect answer by now, like they do for, I mean, like a lot of strength sports and things are a bit more defined, like how, if you want to PB on your deadlift, the manner in which you build up to it and focus on it will likely have a lot less variance than say, trying
to climb your first 8A, a boulder, because that could be, you know, anything could be "jewel" could be "rainbow rocket" (dubious), but it could be, uh, you know, like, I don't know, a 30-move traverse.
So the variance in climate is massive depending on the goal. And then obviously that sets our training just into sort of, uh, just this, um, split stream of so many different paths to try and arrive at the same place.
So, um, yeah, so with, with fingers, it's, uh, what I like to look at is basically how the strength flows through your hand because it's our starting point. And I thought with this podcast, it should be, it should always be at the starting
point of people's training. Um, and what kind of bugs me is this vagueness of like, or just took a load of weight on
an edge and you'll get better, which is true, but it's like blunderbuss and rifle. And, um, like to me, the, the foundations of what lies in your hand should be established before you do that, because should you be provided with that knowledge?
Um, hopefully you could just get better, quicker, basically, which is what people really want to do when the training is like, they don't want to, if you said, Oh, you can spend 10 years and make slow progress, or you can spend like two years to make faster progress, who's going to pick the first option, you know, unless you really enjoy what you're doing and sort of growing slowly.
Um, and I think through climbing in general, if you look back through the history, essentially, that's all we've done, we've got gradually smarter in the way we train and what we pay attention to. And that's how we're standing on the shoulders of past generations and progressing. And I still think there's plenty of legroom in it.
I don't think, you know, this is still a fledgling sport. So the scientific studies into how we train, you know, scant compared to other Olympic sports.
SD: Right.
DV: Um, but what I do love is, um, the fact that that's still full of tinkering. So I can sit up here way, you know, in my own little quiet part of the world with just a few mates, but we can make fun progress and, um, Aiden's just like ridiculously surpassed what someone paid attention to those training things. I like he's, he's built on loads of things.
So like, I'm not, I wouldn't want to take credit for Aiden's ability and that he's done so much himself and I'm learning from him now. So it's like, it's, it's a reversal of the process in terms of many things. Um, but what I think we both really share in common is attention to detail and we can communicate really well with it.
And, uh, and it works like I am getting better at the specific things I want to get better at because I can have a quick chat and look, I'm lucky enough to sort of climb with my mate, but, um, back when I was in Sheffield, it's the same thing. And that's one thing I'd really stress to people is that if you can make the effort to train with people that are like minded or similar abilities, you don't even have to like them.
People, people probably don't like me, but, um, they'll put up with me because it might learn the other thing.
I don't know. But, um... 
SD: he seemed like a friendly guy.
DV: It's, it's really beneficial. You know, it's, uh, like I, I learned so much when I was training with Ned and vice versa and we, we, we fed off each other and our house in general then was great because I also lived with Dave Mason when, uh, after uni in Sheffield. Good climber called Ben Thompson. So we had like a great house to bounce around with.
Um, uh, just like, you know, how we were training, just the general buzz when you sat on the couch and what you're discussing, you don't realize at the time, but it's actually, it was, it was great fun and you learn a lot.
And yeah, just that that's invaluable. So it's been nice to have people up here and it's not, not just Aidan.
There's a lot of other good climbers up here. Um, some of which it doesn't tend, it's quite hard to live where I do.
And, um, Aidan's also quite lucky in that he's grown up here. So, you know, some parts of the world are just trickier to, to live in. If you can't get the job established and get the other parts of life that you want to do to, and, um, and that's why I bet loads of people would love to live in Rocklands, but we're not making it work, you know,
things like that. So we're quite, we are quite lucky to be where we are. And the other thing that is very important about this area, which should probably be stressed is just how many rock types we have. Um, which is quite different and unique to even other parts of the UK, which we already have loads of rock types, but I think we have almost every
rock type at our disposal. So if I want to climb on granite, that's similar to Little Cottonwood, I've got like areas in the Lake District, which are like, there's nowhere near the quantity, but there are just little pockets of
quality and granite, granite, you know, it's, so there's, there's been some really good problems over there that I've got to enjoy, um, over the years and then sandstone, I'm spoiled for loads of good sandstone, gritstone, slate, limestone, different volcanics and the sites, rhyolite. Um, so, and, and there, the, the volcanic rock types are closer.
They're more like central Lake District and that's where Aiden lives. So we, we live in slightly different parts of the county, but in American terms, we're like next door neighbors. We're only like 40 minutes from each other.
SD: Okay. Okay.
DV: Pretty close.
SD: Let me jump in. Um, this, I mean, this is amazing, but I want to get back to Aiden and the high angle crimp thing, um, and hear a little bit more about that. But I want to fill in a little context about some of the things you just touched on. So I love your blunderbuss/ rifle analogy and actually just listen to the interview you did on lattice.
Just refresh that for me. Um, I think that came out last month in July, so, um, and a great conversation for people that want to learn more about you, but yeah, so you, you were basically saying like, you know, the blunderbuss approach
is we go to the climbing gym and we climb and we do hit on things in our fingers that make us stronger.
But, you know, the contrast is, is getting on the fingerboard and doing something very, very specific.
And that's more like the precision of having a rifle and it's, I love that and you've basically done that again, you know, now you're thinking about general fingerboarding is the blunderbuss and you've made your finger training much, much more specific, which is really interesting to me in particular, because I have these, uh, and I talk about this
Ad nauseam (???) on the podcast, but I have these like major weaknesses in certain grip types and in my finger strength.
And after talking to Ned, it's really become a lot more clear to me that just active gripping in general is something that I have really neglected and really struggle with and could really benefit from focusing on. Um, because I've always learned, I've always climbed really passively. I've always relied on friction and, you know, nuancing all the handholds and hanging on my skin as much as possible and things like that. Um, so I think you're going to be able to provide me some tools to focus my training on that. But getting back to Aidan, um, one thing I wanted to mention is that
you coached him for a long time. 
DV: the only person i've ever coached.
SD: the only person you've ever coached. Okay. Yeah.
DV: I'm not coach, but, um, uh, in a proper Cumbrian casual way. Yeah. I, um, I did a couple of years and more mentoring really. And, um, just kind of, yeah, like a couple of years of mentoring. Um, uh, maybe I can't remember how many years it was now, but it's kind of ongoing. It's just more casual now.
So it was only like, it was like official for a couple of years, but actually after a while I was like, let's just, I can't bother charging you anymore. We'll just crack on and go out climbing. And, uh, and, and yeah, to be honest, you should probably charge me now. But I mean, that's, that's what's cool. Well, what's been nice is actually, if you look at it this way, it's just kind of like, I think he's taken all the good points and the, maybe some of the good advice and ignored all the stupid things I told him and done them well and got himself like a lot better base in terms of an athletic, more balanced base, which all the younger climbers seem to be doing now, whereas I'm old enough to have been more about just going climbing and trying hard. And I'm scrambling hard in my thirties to try and achieve a bit more balanced just to avoid injury and things like that. Um, but, uh, yeah, so for, through that process, uh, we've learned a lot. So if you want to talk about, um, crimp angles and things and finger power, I don't know that stems from what, like, this is what's fascinating to me in climbing is what everyone finds their niche.
Um, I'm really interested to ask you a bunch of things actually about how you got into climbing because I'm with your finger strength stuff, um, I'll tell you what, I'll wrap this up and then if we move on to that, I'd be dead interested.
SD: Yeah.
DV: Uh, you say you're dead in a passive, um, hangs and things. And I just wonder if your path into climbing was, um, more through like a slow methodical movement on sport routes and things, and just like a bit slower paced. To me that would be reflected in contact strengths and the way certain aspects of your finger strengths have developed bit like in
our last conversation where I was telling you about the old trad climbers and things, because actually that's a really unique and different path into climbing than most people have nowadays, which is explosive gym boulders and
things like that. Uh, so, but anyway, so to kind of finish the point on the differences, um, I think you can only really with the, the finger sling test you went away and did after our last conversation, you can pick through a lot of differences and details that I just think help establish a nice foundation. And then when you get kind of freaky strong climbers, I think you can really pull out the beginnings of why they're different through that test, because we always connect through the hands and if it might not show in the fingers, if, um, but that in itself is data.
Um, it, it, that would tell me, or they might have really strong wrists to climb on sandstone.
They're amazing at compression. They've got body power and that's how you get around it. Whereas for some climbers, it's like, it's a huge weapon. And actually for me, I've probably been over reliant on pretty strong fingers and underdeveloped and loads of other aspects, which is why like, you know, I'm not like an athletic physique and I've probably like got the most. Left from, I have had in the past, like for doing, uh, I don't know, 8B+s back in Sheffield and things went with like, you know, muffin top style body fat. I'm not like, I've never been like, uh, sort of just like a, a sort of reiki and honest of a physique to me because of the way I've approached climbing and climbing and my strengths.
Um, I'm a pure outdoor climber. I just kind of want to be out on the rocks and then, but I also take training seriously because of the gaps between the rocks being a huge draw and a focus and where I've grown up. 
I've had been lucky enough to have lots of climbers in the area. Um, you know, like really good ex world cup climbers and outdoor boulderers, um, have put up lots of problems I've been able to repeat. So, and we're lucky in the UK to have had that history from, um, you know, even the peak curtain, uh, Jerry Moffatt, Ben Moon, Malcolm Smith, Andy L have all had a huge influence in the north of the UK, um, on the boulders. Um, and then to, uh, be able to sort of draw from that training influences.
It's been great, but for me, it's always been all well, how can I solve the remaining gaps if I'm going to keep outdoor climbing, which locally, that's what you have to do. So you get forced to develop the skills to solve the remaining gaps. And locally, Aiden's just carried on with that process in the Lakes. Um, but the rate that he's hoovered them up has been really staggering.
But it's with the special attributes and then just to take it on, like, so to crunch some data, which people do love. Like in a high angle pinky sling, I'd say he's probably got the world record for like lifting on there with the end of your pinky. And that's like close nigh on 20 kilos, like solid 19. And then you'll know from your own tests, like just how much extra power and how hard that feels when the weight doesn't lift off the floor. Um, now what was really exciting for me just then is, cause I wanted to just make sure I have a decent frame of reference because I haven't done any of these tests in a little while. I just lifted 10 kilos off the floor with my pinky, like it wasn't there.
So it shows me my, cause I used to like warm up below that and just make sure whereas I just started at that weight just to see, and, um, yeah, so the gains over the years from when I first started coaching Aiden, when actually my pinky was a very similar strength to yours and your tests, which I think came out around eight or nine kilos, wasn't it? And, um, sorry to Americans for using kilos.
SD: It's okay. I'll convert. Yeah.
DV: Um, yeah, in, in those years by a bit of targeted training, I'm now up to sort of, and I'm not, I'm quite far off my best at the minute for various reasons, lots of DIY and just general, um, lack of like proper on it training. Um, but yeah, no, I was really happy in that sort of 13 went up fine and I was like, oh, well that'll do for today just for like frame of reference case. And, um, cause that's already like a big win for me. So actually, and that's what I think these tests, I don't think this is a
great way of training, but I think it's a fascinating way of gaining insight and checking that things are working.

SD: Okay. Let me, let me jump in. We owe our listeners a bunch of context before we get too swept away in this thing. Um, so just to close the loop on Aiden Roberts for people that don't know who this guy is and Aiden, if you're listening, I would love to have you on the show. Um, I'm so inspired by you, but yeah. So Aiden's in his early twenties and he's really becoming clearly one of the best boulderers in the world. He's so strong. He's particularly good at really small hold crimp climbing. And, uh, he's training for "Burden Of Dreams" right now, the Nalle Hukutaival V17. And he's, it's definitely seems like he's got a shot at doing this thing. So he's, he's at that level.
And, um, one thing I want you to define really quickly, Dan, cause we didn't talk about this. I hadn't really heard the term actually, before I talked to you, it's, I can
kind of intuit what it means, but I know some people are going to be confused, but what is a "high angle crimp" and what is it that you see when Aiden climbs, um, how does it express when Aiden climbs, if that makes sense?

DV: That's the funny thing about climbing, isn't it? Everyone's got their own terminology for stuff a little bit, because it's still niche enough that these things are developing in their own separate clusters. Um, so, um, like basically we discount the thumb in almost all of our training. And once you discount the thumb, you have loads of options of finger angles. Whereas people often just talk about full crimp and half crimp. But the problem with that is there's too many, just too much differentiation.
And there's a, there's a whole world of difference between taking your thumb off and putting it on. And, and actually when it's off, um, most people, when they half
crimp will never bend that pinky. And the pinky is one of the key focal points of, um, transferring power in a crimp position. And the reason why that is, is in terms of pinky and index, which can also get lazy and go into a chisel is it all depends on load, load capacity and access to the incut in the hold.
And a lot of this depends on lock height (???)
So at what point the hold is out from your body. And then not depends on what grip is useful, but also as the grip comes in, how quick you want to move all depends on your load capacity of your fingers in a high angle position so the ability to access the income in the back of the hold. If you're not doing that and you're dragging over the front of the holds and generating power by pulling underneath through it, you won't be able to move above the holds with control.
So what people tend to do that climbing that style is load up and then move dynamically hold to hold and sort of explode and flick up there and then catch the other one.
And that's great if your fingers take a high amount of load in a non-failure grip.
So chisel or drag tends to be those grips. And if you're really lucky, you'll be one of the people that can maybe hang large amounts above your bodyweight uh, in a half crimp position, which is also incredibly useful.
And there's, there's loads of ways that, um, not loads of ways, but there are, there are many ways of achieving that great finger strength that reflects on your style.
So I know good 8C boulderers that don't have a very strong pinky. But there's often like silver bullet attributes that just mean they can walk up to problems and nail them.
So with regards to your results, like you're kind of missing two silver bullets, but you've got some really other, you've got some other great attributes and balances that people would kill to have. 
Um, but so one just classic, um, thing, which a lot of good climbers have is so that kind of half crimp dead hang and we see loads of people hanging on one arm on finger board. 90% of the time, the pinkies taken at least 25 to 30 kilos of their bodyweight because it's straight. And then the other bent fingers make up the rest.
And so that, that pinky mono ability, which then you see people do do pinky mono front-leavers. It's like, yeah, no shit. Cause all your dead hanging has been like essentially training you pinky to hang in a mono position.
It's like, it's your other fingers that will be grab(?) like a half crimp most of the time.
And that's so like you can overgeneralize like that and it's quite true, but then you can meet people, you know, like I've spoken to Jim Pope a bit and he actually
has a weak pinky and confront free (three??) half crimp that hang, but struggles to get much out of his pinky.
And it's just the way people develop as they go as they climb.  And, and this is why I wanted to do that test with you to sort of discuss some actual useful stuff, hopefully, because, um, you can go through life and this is like everything you can, if you just kind of skip past the intricacies and the analytics and the details, and you can just go training. Um, it's great fun. It like it, it's really good fun.
And, uh, but you might miss massive black holes and, um, it's quite obvious sometimes that cause like, once you get into this type of way of looking at
details, um, it starts to explain things and then you can't like, uh, you can't magic that strength.
So I can't just trick a test and like lift over 15 kilos with my pinky in like a, in a crimp in a sling that power's just not there.
But then when I go to put that power on, on a problem, it will show up that I'm weaker on crimps.
Like I can't trick it. What I can do is use my styles and attributes to trick the problem and to climb on the rock in that style.
But if I want to climb, sorry, slow and control and be able to grab all the holds precisely, like my young friend from the lakes, um, and look like a sort of a hydraulic, uh, rock destroyer, like the rocket, like if you're, if there's small holds and, uh, rocks, he's Aiden coming at the minute, then it's, you know, it's just going to think, ah, shit, I should, I should've gone with the vague. I should've gone with the vague features. Like this, this guy's got me, um, it really is the case.
Like at the moment, it's just mental. 
SD: Unstoppable on crimps. 
DV:That's what's cool about climbing. There's like, there's so many styles and attributes that all, all, all we have to do is like trap Aiden, in a little tiger pit with loads of Font 8A dynos to get out. And he's stuck in there for life.
SD: I love it. Okay. Let me jump in again. I'm, I'm going to, um, say some things back to you to make sure I'm understanding it correctly and fill in some, uh, gaps for listeners. So I'll define the high angle crimp thing, um, in my own words. And you can tell me if I'm, if I'm getting it right.
Um, so yeah, for people listening, imagine that your hand is in a full crimp position. You can wrap your thumb if you want to. The high angle crimp is like the most aggressive crimp you would ever use. So every single finger is bent at a 90 degree at the pip joint, including your
pinky, it's really aggressive. Your fingertips are almost pointed downward and you would use that...
DV: Nah, you match the incut. Sorry. Um, so if it's a really incut hold, your knuckles will be hitting against the wall because you'll be, you're accessing whatever the incut is. So if you're talking like 45, 55 degree incut in micro crimp, you just go to that angle and then access it so you can pull outwards like it's a jug.
Um, the problem for most people is: your grip will fail. Because there's too many small muscles. And if you haven't trained it, if it's not been styled for many years, it will just fail and you'll flop back onto a half crimp with likely a pinky or a chisel straight, which because of the incut, you'll still snag on it.
butv yeah, that's, um, so there's no real definition of the angle Um, I would just say what, what I'm saying is you're getting into the back of the hold.

SD: Yeah. You're getting into the back of the hold so you can pull outward and use that leverage. And what you were saying about the pinky before is that most of our
training, um, just globally as a climbing community, people that are obsessed with trying to hang one arm on your Beastmaker center edge.
Uh, you know, we, we all love the half current position and a lot of people just train in that position. But what Dan's saying is that for most of us, just the shorter length of our pinky will necessitate that the pinkies in a open position when we're half crimping.
And so we're essentially, no matter how much finger training we're doing, we're only ever training our pinky to be straight and never crimped.
And, um, so I want to take a second to describe the sling test that you had me do, and then we can just dive right into it. So what Dan, what Dan had me do, um, I took a 12 mil sling, and this is just like a Alpine runner that I had in my, in my bag, attached a carabiner to it, loop that around a kettlebell and then attach the sling, just slung it over the tip of one finger.
So for instance, my index finger, just right over the tip, as if I were pulling on a small, you know, 10 mil edge or something like that, a small little crimp, and then put my finger in a aggressive crimp position and then try to lift the kettlebell off the floor.
And then do that with every single finger and just keep going up in the weights until I can't lift the kettlebell off the floor anymore.
So essentially isolating every single one of my eight fingers, I didn't do this with my thumbs, um, in a isolated crimp position.
So I'm testing every single finger on their own in a crimp position. And Dan's thinking is that that will, that would help me discover how the distribution of the load is coming across my different fingers. So basically how each finger is contributing to my finger strength. If I'm crimping an edge with four fingers, you know, what's the percentage of each, how is each finger contributing to the overall load?
Like what percentage of my weight is it taking? So it was super interesting going back to what you said about Aiden. When I crimped with my pinky and lifted a kettlebell off the floor using the sling, I think my max was 20 pounds, which is 9.1 kilos. And you said that Aiden can do 20 kilos. So 44 pounds, about twice where I'm at.
So just imagine like he's literally, his pinkies are twice as strong as mine. And then I'm sure all of his other fingers are stronger too. But so yeah, I did this test...
DV: Um, that day it was like two years old as well.
SD: Okay. He's probably even stronger now.
Right.
So, yeah, I, I, um, I went through this entire test. I made a spreadsheet with my results. I will share that for you guys in the show notes so you can see it.
And, um, what do you think we should do, Dan? Should we talk about my results, share the numbers and then dive into what they mean?
Or how do you, how do you want to go from here or where do you want to go from here? 

DV: Should I just break down some key points?

SD: Yes, please.
DV: And then, and so first I'll ask, did you learn anything? And what do you think? Do you think differently? Or is this confirmed what you thought about your hands? Or have you, has it flagged up anything?
SD: I think it has confirmed what I thought about my hands. Um, which is that they're, they're quite balanced. I got the exact same results with my right and left hand.
And there were a couple lifts that were marginally harder with my left hand, but this, it ultimately came out to the same amount of weight lifted off the floor. And if I tried to go any heavier, um, that was my max. It just felt slightly harder with my left hand, slightly more desperate. I mean, I'm pretty far just crunching the numbers and seeing, you know, if you add them all up to see like how much weight would I theoretically be able to hold with one hand in a crimp position?
It's very far off from body weight, which is not a surprise to me at all. You know, I'm, I'm 60 pounds away theoretically from being able to hang from one hand on a small crimp.
DV: Um, but you get, you kind of get there on chisel when you're in, which is open four, I think a lot of Americans call it ????.
SD: Yeah. So chisel, I actually misunderstood chisel for a long time, but yeah, it's basically open for where your index and your pinky are both straight and then your middle two fingers are kind of half crimped. Yeah.
DV: One thing I will say actually is, um, like the way I don't quite have the data, I should have said slide the sling back as well to the, um, pip knuckle, a bit like the open handed test. It will give you a bit better data about your half crimp.
Because I've kind of got a good insight on you on kind of high angle stuff, which I think is really important, especially if you're climbing outside and the open data is very, um, good and true as well but I think you would have got slightly higher loads. You would have possibly a lot higher loads by sliding that back and just having a slightly more open finger angle, which would be your half crimp representation. So if you want it to do that afterwards, you might, um, get sort of a bit more insight as to, um, if anything changes, cause one, cause one of the insights and one of the things I really picked up on, uh, with your data was you've got two lazy fingers, which are lacking silver bullets.
SD: Okay.
DV: One is: your middle finger should be pulling. Your middle finger is just kind of hanging with the crew and needs to step up its game. it's just like out with the boys and whatever they do, it does. Um, whereas it needs to be like the star player and the, the, um, what do you Americans call the, uh, the quarterback?
SD: Yeah. Okay.
DV: The middle finger should always be quite a bit stronger. I think in most people I've kind of mucked about with over the years, middle finger can normally punch pretty high. For me, it was interesting that your middle didn't have loads of distance, like clear water in terms of weight, it can pull above the ring and the index.
Now you'd, you'd expect pinky to be weak, but actually I think so you're on the flip side, I think your pinky in a crimp position is actually pretty strong for where you're at at the minute. Um, I was pretty impressed by, in general, you've got a really good load spread across your hand, which is great, uh, for like kind of evenly loading through small crimps. But you sell yourself short because the middle finger and the, probably the ring would be the next one I would pick to sort of, that should be targeted. It could be the index depending on like they are a little bit interchangeable, but certainly the middle finger to me, I would say that in people that say would often test with a similar amount of pinky strengths, I might even see like 10 kilos, more strength in their middle finger for like that level of pinky strength that you've got. So that's what makes me think actually there's something going on with the way your middle fingers being stimulated through, you know, how you've learned how your nerves, your sort of that pathway of how you fire through your hand, which is meaning that like the, that's why you sort of missing a part of the load.
Now the other part of the load that's missing is when that pinky goes straight, that's probably the bigger one is actually, um, that could be pulling like 20 kilos more, uh, straight, which to me reflects now, this is the interesting thing, cause we've already touched on this in the, on a lot of holds outside that wouldn't translate directly, but in terms of training goals, it would translate really well on the fingerboard and on steep boards. So your moon boards and your kilter boards.
And if someone's got one of our bespoke one... 
yeah, the, uh, so like the, the pinky is an interesting one because I would, how you address that entirely depends on what your goals are and I don't know them at the minute. So yeah, like what, what do you just want to kind of, some people just want to improve and then get better at kind of just get stronger and things on some people are all about kind of adapting to what, you know, is on the rock and on what their goals are specifically.

SD: Yeah. Yeah.
Once again, for people that are curious about the numbers, I'll share my spreadsheet so you can just see how I tested. Um, I want to, I'll, I'll answer your question.
I will get to that in one second, but just to paint a little bit more of a picture, um, so I had these kettlebells and I was going up in kettlebells, testing each finger.
I also had a one kilogram weight, which is two, actually I had a 2.5 pound weight, which is just over one kilo and I had a 1.25 pound weight, which is about half a
kilo. Um, so I had those as well and I would attach those to the kettlebells to, to make these jumps smaller, um, and make the results a little bit more specific.
But then for people listening, I'll just share the percentages. So if you, if I was in a full crimp position and you know, the, the most I could pull potentially with all four fingers is about 112 pounds, 51 kilos. 22% of that is coming from my index. 32% of that is coming from my middle, 28% coming from my ring and 18% coming from my pinky.
And so this is really interesting. What Dan is saying that is that if, um, if my middle was as strong as he would expect it to be relative to my pinky, it should be, you know, pulling 40, 50% or something of my weight and, and be, um, you know, 10 kilos more than it is. So anyway, just wanted to share that real quick.
And then now I've forgotten your question.
Yeah. Yeah. So no, this is, this is really good. This is really important. And, um, I do have specific goals.
I really want to climb. I really want to climb some 5.14s.
I mean, I, I do just want to get better. That's the short answer.
But what I have noticed is that the limiting factor for me always seems to come down to something that's pretty basic. It's that type of finger strength that you use when you're climbing on a board. It's that active finger strength. That's the ability to hang a pretty good edge, like a one pad edge with a lot of weight on your hands.
You know, some of the sport climbs that I've been trying around St. George, the limiting factors are not that complicated.
You know, I just need to be able to hang on some of those holds with a lower percentage of my max so that I can do more moves in a row, or so that I can do
a hard clip and then make the next move or things like that. And, um, that's starting to express it in my bouldering as well. Like the boulders that I want to do.
Um, I think I just need stronger fingers to be able to do them. And every time I've done any sort of finger strength testing, I'm usually performing at a higher grade in bouldering and in sport climbing than you would expect based on my finger strength. And especially when it comes to like loading up a half crimp or something on a decent edge. Um, yeah. And to, and to take you back further. So you asked the question about where I came from in my climbing. A lot of my early climbing, it wasn't sport climbing, but it was actually very slow controlled climbing. I climbed in a gym that was really old school. Um, everything was vertical up to like 10 degrees overhanging, lots of old greasy, like small crimps and things like that. And, um, I just moved like a sloth. You know, I started climbing at 18 years old and I had a decent amount of body strength. Um, I had a background in some weightlifting and some other sports and things. So my fingers were always the limiting thing, but I could compensate by moving
really, really slow and controlled and like take my time to get the hold perfectly. You know? And, um, and I've always climbed that way. And then that was paired with climbing in on granite in Leavenworth, Washington, which is very featurey. It's a lot of squeezing, it's a lot of compression, it's a lot of tricks, you know, um, squeezing between a heel and a hand or things like that. And so that combination...
go ahead.

DV: Would you favor chisel on that Leavenworth and things like that?
Like open four.

SD: Yeah. Yeah, I think so. And, and small crimps as well. Um, it's interesting. Like I always felt like I was pretty decent at small crimping, but not with a lot of weight on my hands. And then I was pretty good at open hand, but it was everything in between that felt really hard.
So I remember, uh, the first, the first time I climbed on like a 40 degree wall or a 45 degree wall on decent holds, this was like a V5 in Joe's Valley.
And I think I'd climbed V9 at the time. Couldn't do it. You know, I couldn't climb on like a one, one pad in cut holds in a half crimp or any sort of grip position.
Um, cause I always relied on sneaky ways to get around just hanging on my fingers, if that makes sense.



DV: No, that that's really interesting. Cause, uh, um, I would guess that there's a lot of things.
So, you know how I've said, like, you're missing the silver
bullets in the fingers, often climbers.
If you can jump and load up a hand, you kind of need to be able to put
that load through the hand, which is explosive and dynamic.
So there's usually like a finger that can take a lot on a mono that's straight.
And because you don't have that, you don't have like a, a finger that's
punching up in the 30 kilo range.
Um, that was one thing that made me think, Oh, does this guy like move
in kind of like a controlled trad style more and like, and you told me a bit
about like being more of a technician and things, but so the other thing.
Which was like, interesting was yeah.
The middle finger in crimp position, but also the fact that when I saw
combine them across, it made me think that that would be your strongest grip
would be kind of like open four, because you're getting the most out of the
fingers in that way in terms of grip applicability, but also finger load.
And, um, but yeah, like it to me, it's like, it's kind of obvious, like, um,
you've got to find a way of stimulating that middle finger, especially cause
that's a low hanging fruit.
And if you want to kind of get either pinky monos or index monos up, um, I
mean, I can probably still warm enough to like give you a demonstration
because we're a similar risk body weight.
Okay.
So like, what are you?
78 or 76.
78.

SD:  Yeah.
I'm about 78 kilos.
So 172 pounds for people listening.
Something like that right now.
Yeah.

DV: 
I'm like 77. 

SD: 
Okay.
But, um, Dan's giving me a demonstration here.
What do you have set up there?

DV: 
Oh, I've just got like a loading pin.
Okay.
But I made it out of my fireplace, fireplace poker.
And, um, what have I gone here?
This is 20, 20 kilos.
And, um, I'll just use that.
So yeah, this is more like personal training session than podcast,
but hopefully people will get the gist.

SD: Yeah.

DV: I've got 20 kilos on there underneath.
SD: Okay.

DV: And, um, if I put that on one part, I'll do it with left, but really this like 25, 30, but like I could carry that around
all day long in the open position.
Whereas if I go high angle, I mean, that's not going to move really isn't.
So that just gives you like for that to feel relaxed for me, you know, like
three to five seconds would be fine.
And then again, for the index, if I can try and be a bit stricter with where it is,
but you know, those, those kind of open relaxed loading ones, that is like a
really useful component in grip to develop.
And, um, because what you're doing is you're solving a weight issue on the hold.
And, um, so if, if your pinkie can, let's say loads of people will be up above 20
in, it depends on body weight, obviously, but if you can hack out 20 to 25 kilos,
if your body weight, then you've only got to spread the remaining 50 ish, 52
across the other fingers, which suddenly, and, but because if you put them in a
half crimp, then that becomes quite tricky.
And that's why we struggle to one arm dead hang because generally, and this
is where the middle finger will often.
Pick up the slack.
So for myself, um, I'm at like 28 to 30 kilos on the middle.
And actually my index is kind of a bit crap compared to, so
like I struggled to get over 15.
So there's a huge imbalance between my middle finger and my index.
And that's why in the past few years, I've been slowly targeting my index
and it has, it has improved.
And, um, and that's really helped on, but what's, what's interesting is
actually I kind of was doing that for a little bit and then I've ditched it.
Then I've gone at a much higher knuckle angles because that translates far
better to, to rock and what I want to achieve upside and, um, and I've all,
I've sort of been off a lot of my.
So like my biological trick is the drag, which like, but that's three
finger open instead of four finger open.
So I'm not a huge fan of chisel versus open three.
If I can use open three, because I think open three versatile, because
what it allows is the next thing that we haven't discussed, which is
wrist movement and wrist movement is key to moving.
It's all very well hanging on a fingerboard or, you know, like
essentially doing lifts off floor or gym lifts or whatever.
But this is the problem.
Whenever you isolate something, you're removing components.
And if you remove the component and you forget about it, it will come back to
bite you if it's been a big oversight.
Now, the oversight with grip is always the next thing in the, in the chain,
which is the wrist.
And that's where these tests are.
The be all and end all, because there's this whole interplay
with all the other body parts.
Um, the way I break it down, uh, drags of rubbish open three are so
rubbish in terms of outwards pull.
You just can't outwards pull with a drag and you, you can't really lock
below your shoulder with them.
So you're a bit stuck on rock types, but if you go to Font, everything's
a giant ball or an egg, you know, like barely anything is, um, concave.
Everything's convex.
So it's all like bending away from you.
And that's why the shoulders compression and the elbows explode for people.
That's like just trying to sum up and stereotype one style of climbing
that hopefully people will understand.
But obviously each area has its own, you know, like granite isn't just
granite is it varies worldwide slightly depending on the grain size
and, and the surface features.
Some granites really blank and just relies on compression.
Like your coastal granites tend to be much more grant, um, much blanker.
And then if you've had a lot of freeze thaw and fracturing, you
might have a bit more patina, especially in the desert areas.
Like in USA though, you've got a lot of aridity and dryness.
Do you get more of that patina shattering, which creates holds.
Oh, um, so you get small holds and, um, and then, yeah,
glaciation, things like that.
There's so much that forms our rocks and, um, but that all interplays
with how we can climb up them.
And the two are directly linked.
So if you, uh, and, and so the way that feeds back into grip is, um, like
our style is determined by kind of what, what we want to use, but if you want
just some like absolute bankers, you know, like that's going to work.
Then you talk in your half crimp pinky straight three bent,
because that's really versatile.
But if you want to talk Trump's (?????) that, this is my current thinking.
And for a loads of rock types, especially bouldering, um, then you get the knuckle
up, you get access to the back of the anchor and suddenly everything's
like you're climbing on jugs.
And then however, there's loads of caveats.
So with your route climbing specializing in a grip, which has a much higher failure Potential.
such as high angle crimp probably won't do you as many favors as
getting good at the, um, grips that can take higher loads without failing for
longer, because often in sport climbing, because you can use the rest of your
body, uh, to displace load and to flow through the move, then all you're really
looking for is for your grip not to fail.
Whereas with bouldering, you might be, you're trying to find like
the blanckest hardest way up thing, or like you're, you're going to your limit a bit
more, so there is a good chance the grip will fail.
So if, um, but in, in a power related saying, so I'm just trying to explain
things through, um, through the hand and finger power rather than, you know,
it's a bolder problem, it's a root type of thing, but, um, how that would reflect
on your training personally is I would say for your route climbing, the pinky
being straight is a high priority.
And, um, it's probably more of a priority than it being bent.
However, the middle finger being sort of slightly down on load is a priority for
everything, because to me, that's probably, that's the lowest hanging
fruit to work on.
And then the things that you can take away as being like pretty switched
on right now are actually kind of your pinky and your index, um, performing
really well in relation to kind of the general levels of benchmarks.
I would expect it like, you know, for how far down the road you are in terms
of climbing and niche training.
And, um, because they said, that's what we're trying to do, isn't it?
Where we could all just go to the gym and do the three power lift if it was going
to pay off.
Really good climbing results, but unfortunately we've got to specialize.




SD: Okay.
Let me summarize things again.
So, uh, for people listening, I did the whole test, the sling test in
crimp positions with every finger.
And then I did it again in an open position for each finger, which is a
little different because of just the physics of it.
So you have to put the sling further up on your finger, basically turning it
into like a one pad hold instead of a fingertip hold.
So of course the loads are going to go up just from that.
But then also I'm, I think I'm stronger open hand.
Um, so yeah, I want to reiterate some things and make sure I'm
getting everything right.
So my, my pinkies in a crimp position, I was able to lift about nine kilos and
then open hand pinky about 16 kilos.
And so you're saying one of the standouts for you is that my open hand
pinky should be closer to 20 kilos.
Is that right?

DV:
Yeah. Like at least.
I would have expected it to have jumped up quite a lot.
And the fact that those two are quite close, like without, if I didn't know
you and I was just looking at the data at all, and you know, just, just the
data and I had to try and invent a climber, I'd be like, well, they
obviously, um, favor, uh, pulling through with the pinky bent quite a
lot on small holds because it's just not taking the load on, on bigger ones.
But that also mean, um, like, but then when I looked at the index,
that your index was actually like pretty good.
Like it's not, it's, it's just like doing well.
And, uh, and then I was like, oh, well actually, if you add that into
chisel that, um, that works pretty well.
So that I I'm sort of inventing this climber that does like, you know,
lots of climbing like that and, and then at high angle, but then maybe.
Like, this is almost totally missing from being like a real strength.

SD:
Yeah.
I'm going to, I'm going to jump in just because people, not everyone's
going to be able to see the video here.
So, yeah, no worries.
So, um, Dan was saying that he was imagining just from looking at my
numbers that I would likely climb a lot in a chisel position, which is like an
open four and in a small crimp or like full crimp position, and then what was
missing would be the half crimp, like the in-between you're spot on.
You're exactly, you're exactly, exactly right.
Yeah.
Um, those are, that is how I climb.
That's how I've kind of always climbed.
Half crimp has always been a struggle.
I've been training it honestly too, for a long time now.
And it just, it just seems to be a really, really slow, um, aggravating
journey to improve my half crimp.
Um, this might be a little bit of a tangent, but I wanted to ask you this.
One thing I've noticed with the half crimp for me is that my pinky feels
like the length of my pinky, I think is an interesting thing to think about.
So if I'm in a half crimp in my index, middle and ring fingers are all
bent at a 90 at the, uh, pip joint.
My pinky almost feels like it's in between, like it's not, it's a little
bit too long to really be hanging open, but it's not long enough
to be also able to crimp up.
So it feels like it's kind of stuck in this no man's land where it just
can't really contribute very much.
And I wonder if that's a big part of why it's weak, because it's not able
to pull that much when I'm training it.
And also why my, my half crimp feels so difficult.

DV:
What sort of pressure do you put through your pinky?
So if you were to just visualize your pinky when you're hanging, um, are you
trying to squish with the end of it when it is open and does like, or does
your knuckle kick in, in the bend or do you, and are you like relaxing
in the way that it's hanging?
So this is the whole passive and active thing, but just go into more
nerdery, how does that play out in your pinky in terms of like, cause say,
if you, if I try and pick that weight up there now with 20 kilos and I try
and sort of like squish it with my fingertip, I won't be able to lift it.
But if I, if I have it nicely nestled on the joint and I sort of almost
relax a bit and I lift it more with connective tissue and, um, sort of
pulley stickage, then that can lift a much higher load.
So I'm just wondering if in your head, whether those kind of like the activation
pathways of how you're trying to activate the grip, maybe there's
something in that that's worth discussing.


SD:
Yeah, that's interesting.
There might be something there.
I think I'll, I'll pay attention to that next time I'm hanging on the
board.
What I think I'm doing is I think I'm trying to use it like a sky hook, you
know, just hang it, just skin hanging on the edge of the hold, but it feels like
it's slightly too long to do that naturally.
If my other fingers are in a half crimp position, if that makes sense, you know.

DV:
Yeah.
And does it slip?
SD:
Good question.
DV:
Does it move?
SD:
Uh, yeah, I'm not sure.
I'll think about that next time I'm training.
 
DV:
If it's not moving, um, you probably have enough, uh, pit like, uh, FTP
pressure in it to maintain the grip.
So there's, there's a good way of, um, anchoring it, but if it is slipping,
then you're not getting the tip pressure in the FTP.
And you might be say activated through your finger end connection
rather than your crimp connection.
And for me with the lack of activation, say on your pinky lift, there's
something there that maybe says, um, I mean, sort of regardless of, of, of
what's gone before, I think you can tackle it or these things are always 
tackleable just by finding a good way to isolate them.
And I don't necessarily think that's finger lifting off the floor actually.
Um, what I think, uh, you almost need to find, this is what I've always done.
This is why the, the Beastmaker, like we have the progression, like I never
wanted people to, um, to train pockets because you should just train pockets.
Like they're not important for most of the climbing, but they're really
important for activating your hand properly.
So back to you is like this key.
When you get onto bird beaks, I'm back to people find back to horrible.
But then when you, once you get down onto like one pad pockets, you start to bird
beak and once you can, which is when the pinkies straight and the ring fingers
bent and once you're on back to you with that, with that grip formed, um, that
translates so well into half crimp.
But what you're doing is you're removing the 
the blunderbuss of stimulating the middle and the index, and you're just targeting
that feeling of how to form the back of the half crimp.
So, and this is what I've always thought was a good method of
training, uh, and I could be wrong.
It does frustrate me a little bit that I think a lot of in recent years, people
have, uh, pushed fingerboards that are easier to make in a Play-Doh mold spindle
molded style, but that you do away with all the vagaries, which is great.
Cause you can just say, oh yeah, just among an edge.
But actually what you're doing is you're removing your ability
to visually see insight easily.
And for me, I would stress that insight is a key part of breaking
apart your grips in order to reform it in a way that can, you can build off quicker.
And so that's why I mean, to keep it on sort of fingerboard training chat.
Uh, that's why the Beastmaker looks like it does.
We know we like, it could have just had a bunch of edges on, um, but the whole
point of principle is like, find out where your grip is, we break it apart,
then put it back together, um, rather than just like load the sucker up
and then see when it fails, because like it, it, for me, it works.
And like, I know for Ned it's work for, and this is the problem.
Like I'm not a sociable person.
I've just got a couple of mates that we muck around with this thing with, uh,
but like I'd back it, I'd back this horse all the way.
Like if someone, if someone says like, oh yeah, just like, I'm all right.
Open falls away to go.
I do one arm dead hangs with an extra 30 kilos.
It's like, oh, well done.
I can do one arm drags with an extra 30 kilos on a less than 20 mil edge.
It really doesn't help me get up Aiden's problems in the lakes.

SD: Wow. That's so insanely strong though.
That's crazy.

DV:
It couldn't be a cheater grip in the, you know, like it, it doesn't apply.
It does apply on sandstone and on grit.
And I can really like make it make it pay that, but for little edges, it's,
it's junk, it's total junk.
Like, um, I may as well not have it.
So, um, and, and that's where like, there are tricks in training and there are
things that make you look strong, but actually getting to the applicability
and the, um, like for me, it's, it's, it's like, it's constantly something
you have to work on because also there's so many pitfalls neurologically
just falling back into your normal, you know, everybody wants to climb
in a certain way, we're all built a certain way.
So this is a fight, you know, for me, bench pressing, my body weight is a fight.
I've neglected it my entire life.
It's not something I'm good at.
Uh, I've never bothered with it.
Luckily, I don't feel like I need it for climbing, but I need it for balance.
And I think it will really help me if they get that up now.
And, um, but you know, these are my problems that I need to work on, but
everybody's got their own personal things, but what's interesting is like,
so in terms of finger advice, like I'm, I feel like I'm, I know what I'm working
on and I'm happy, but in terms of like athletic advice and being an athlete,
I'm awful in terms of diet, I'm awful.
I paid, like, I just eat what is in front of me, pay no attention.
Um, in terms of reading conditions and weather, I think I'm pretty
good at making up myself on that.
I did a geography degree.
I've never needed a fire (fen?).

SD:
So you've never, what?

DV:
needed a a fire (fen?)

Yeah.
So, um, I've digressed a bit, but, um, what I'm saying is, uh, hopefully
with these insights, you can begin to know it all.
There's loads of other things to play in like your wrist strength
and how you pull through the hold.
So actually I think you're pretty well set on small holds in terms
of for the time being, almost in that handle position,
except for the middle finger.
Um, so if I was going to try and quickly distill down how you
would work on that theoretically, I would say for your pinky target the back
two in a way that simulates half crimp.
You might want to go straight to bird beak to just avoid vagaries, but take
weight off until you're at like 60 to 70% body weight, which is in a, a
non-threatening grip load, and then just develop that base level with those
density hangs that, you know, like you've got a really good hang routine.
So I would just like be adding that in.
And then for the middle finger, it's trickier in some ways, because I would
say, yeah, I mean, just the natural split is if you were going to target that,
you probably just want to get a good angle with front two and again, back
it off to a level that's like 60 to 70% body weight to out.
And then the main thing is to memorize what the grip feels like when you're
failing on it on a moonboard problem or on the steep board or something like that.
Just capture that in your head.
Pull it back to the fingerboard and find that element of the grip position, but
splitting the fingers, getting rid of the fluff, and then hammer that until it
starts to kick in and when it starts to kick in, put it back together.
And if it feels like it's working, which it should, you will have got stronger.
And then you can just repeat, you know, until, until you need like the next
level of kind of nerdery to, um, to sort of, and then obviously like you don't
need to go too far down these rabbit holes in terms of, for me, like that
would be enough because climbing so multifactorial, you know, it's
probably not the whole picture.
It's just part of the picture, but I do think, um, For you personally,
try and find a way of stimulating that middle finger in crimp position and the
pinky in the straight position.
And then they will be the areas of, of the big payoff.
What's interesting about just comparing to myself is for me, the
battle is with my index being bent and in half crimp, I've had good progress
on my pinky now in bent position, but actually I haven't really paid much
attention to my index pretty strong on the drag and when it's open.
And I think that's also a problem in that as my grip fails, you know, it
falls in almost a stronger position, but I'm not getting out of the hold
what I need to, because I'm not accessing the cuts and things.
Um, but, and so my fight a minute with my training time is high angle
crimps and specifically targeting that the outside of my hand paddle(??), which
is like my index and my pinky because my middle fingers, and I'm lucky in
that I'm similar to Aidan like this so it almost makes it easier to emulate this training and stuff.
And the way we've trained, um, we're both kind of like middle to dominant
crimpers, um, but you do see a real mix of where people put the power through
actually, and, um, I've met climbers over the years, like, um, Ed Hammer,
who was ridiculously strong with his back two, um, I've met.
Good English climbers, like Jeff Caffey, who's ridiculously strong with
this front two and another good climbers.
And it, it isn't just the case that we're all the same, you know?
So that's, that's what I find interesting.
Um, but what I should have done probably is like build up a database,
you know, like a bit, a bit more scientific about it.
But, um, unfortunately I haven't done that because I'm a human and I'm lazy.

SD:
Man, this is fascinating.
So thank, thank you for all that.
First off for the, um, for the recommendations, cause that's of course
what I was most excited about getting out of this conversation and it's
fascinating, but I have a question there, so that's, it's really surprising
actually, and interesting to me that you said that you wouldn't, that you
don't think lifting something off the floor is the best way to take care of
that, um, cause intuitively to me, I got these results and I was like, okay,
I'm going to use the tension block.
I'm going to isolate all my fingers as monos.
I'm going to lift weight off the floor with my pinky mono and
start training it that way.
And then I was just thinking as you were talking like, oh, I could do the
same thing with my middle finger, but basically like half crimping
a mono with the block.
Why not do that?
Why do you think it is that, or why do you recommend that I stand beneath
the hangboard and keep my feet on the ground and pull in these front to
back to crimp positions rather than isolating fingers on their own?

DV:
Yeah.
Like well picked up on, uh, blunderbuss and rifle.
So if you lift off the floor, your wrist angle will not replicate climbing.
It'll be a straight wrist angle.
Um, just like if you lift pinch blocks off the floor, your wrist
is massively, um, on the extensors.
And yet when you climb, unless you're doing like pinch tufa stuff in front
of you, or you're doing a pinch cross through, you never hit your extensors
on a pinch when you're climbing.
When you're on a board, you're deviated and your wrist pretty flat and
you might get a bit of extensive work.
So like the, there are oversights that are built into lifting off the floor,
which, um, every, every reductive form of training has drawbacks, like
fingerboarding has drawbacks as well.
And, but what I don't like about.
Sort of training hard with splitting those fingers up.
There's two things.
Your sessions in the week will be quite impacted.
If you just do like, if you do the off the floor lifts, it'll definitely work.
Um, what I'm trying to do in terms of advice is more up-to-date thinking
of how I think nowadays, which is, um, if you can keep all the applicability
in there and build in the exact grip position that you need, but stimulate
the area, but still have as much.
Uh, it'd be as reductive as possible to kind of target that, but still
have enough elements of climbing that it feeds back, um, like
it'll slot straight back in.
Not with a lot of off the floor lifts and things like that.
Is that great for target load?
Like they do a really good job of isolating and hitting what you need,
especially if you're injured, it's fantastic because you can get rid of the
parts that hurt if you've got shoulder injury and, you know, this can be way
better pulling off the floor probably because you've likely injured it
with your arm above your head.
And, um, so yeah, basically keeping it as applicable as possible while
stimulating as little of your body as possible in terms of extraneous
variables and fluff, but also stimulating as much of your body as possible.
For just translating those neurological pathways and the way you fire straight
back into your climbing, because this is the issue I have with some gym
lifts and stuff like that is we would be, we would see more people coming
into climbing and just smashing out of the park with the kind of gym strength
you get if, if the firing and the pathways were as directly applicable.
And, um, and I like to, with all my high angle crimp training that I've been
doing, if I just hang off my fingers, I really don't like the way I can't dig
in the back of the holds because you're hanging directly below them.
So what I do is I chuck my feet forwards and I step on a tiny little edge.
So it's almost like I'm just sort of doing dead hangs on the board, but
that means I can pull out and I can activate my rear deltoid.
So trying to emulate Aiden again, and then, um, but what that does is it
create, I get the incut, I get the, I get the outpull and then I get the
stimulation in the pathway that I need.
Otherwise I'll just fire onto my lats(??).
And I, if I, because my drag and stuff and my non failing grip
types can just rip through my lats.
I've always been quite a dynamic, flicky climber.
I've not been great at static climbing.
So I'm having to like shunt and bludgeon this form of climbing back
into, uh, back into me at age 35.
And it's, it's kind of working in some ways, but I just don't
have the time now for it to.
Um, I think I would love to do this experiment in my twenties and see,
just get out on rock a bit more and, you know, just cross
compare how much it works.
But what I keep doing is get really inspired by sandstone projects.
Go with, you know, in all my spare time, I'd go off to the wilderness
and when no one cares about in England, try all these hard boulders.
Um, on sandstone.
And then I come home and train all this like high angle crimp
shoulders style and don't use any of it.
So what I wanted to do was to actually get in the Lakes this year and start
to put it down and get on the projects I failed on the past, but I've had this really annoying arm injury that
has, uh, mostly stopped that this year to just like a bit of a neck
brachioradialis nerve thing.
That's been really hard to pin down.
And, um, but I'm finally getting there with it.
Uh, basically I just too much DIY and kid carrying and yeah, the
general life would break you down.
Uh, but yeah, that's why basically, sorry.

SD:
No, this is all great.
Okay.
So I'm going to, I'm just going to repeat it back to you though.
So the reason I would do this on a hangboard instead of lifting off the
floor is because it's still targeted and very specific to the things
I'm, I'm focusing on on my fingers.
It's reductive in that way, but it.
It maintains some of the more applicability to climbing
than lifting off the floor would.
It's just like, you know, the wrist angle is a little bit more
relevant and things like that.

DV:
Yeah, the wrist and then how it feeds in each shoulders and your arms.
But what I would say is if you feel more comfortable, if you, whichever
way you can, you can bottle that feeling, you need to like take a
picture, a sort of feeling picture of the grip, and then you need to copy
and paste that back into your training.
But with, with it split out the, you know, taking out the part you need,
which for you, I would say would be like back to bird beak, which is, or
like, um, front two crimp like that.
And now the, the weights you're going to be training on with
those are going to be really low.
So it might be better to do it on the floor and lifting off the floor.
If you don't have a good pulley set at home or wherever you train to take
the weight off on the fingerboard, because that is going to give you
better results, but if you do, what I'm saying is please do it on the
fingerboard because it has more applicability and shapes that you're
making with your back and your arms, um, for climbing now, the difference
is if you want to get really clever and periodize training and things
do that off the floor lift.
If you're going to hit another element of your training on a different day.
So it's the whole, you know, train what's fresh, um, principle.
And, and, but that to me is like an extra level of like real training plan
which I think most climbers will struggle to nail that.
I mean that most people just want to get on a, you know, they
haven't got that much time.
Um, it's best to just keep it at the level of keep it applicable because I
think you get into dangerous territory if you go to reductive.
So I think you could get, say really good at climbing with
like a load (lot) of gym exercises.
And if you split the days apart and you've got like that perfect training
cycle, you could hit all the muscles well and get all that extra gain in
terms of just everything getting to recover properly and you're not having
that crossover, which we've climbing were awful at the crossover, especially
on the fingers, like we just hit the fingers all the time in the week.
Like, Oh, I'll do routes and I'll do bouldering and out.
You could just like, you're on your fingers the whole week.
No one in strongman does that.
They don't like hit their abs or their core, you know, but they're
lucky enough that they, but the sport is able to be reduced easily.
Ours is too movement-complex to do it.
But if you were talking like, um, yeah, so you, you can periodize like that,
but I think that's why you need good coaching and stuff.
And for me, yeah, you, you would just like, you'd really have to take some
time and write and break that apart in the week, which you could do like,
um, yourself or who you work with.
And that's where I would do the off the floor lift to deliberately separate
it and try and not get that crossover.
So again, this is what we're on about that whole thing.
Uh, hold that whole point that like, nobody's got the right answer and you
can just experiment with what works.
Um, but hopefully what I've tried to add is I would back that these
are good things for you to work on.
If you can encapsulate that feeling of why it's failing and
transplant that onto the fingerboard and just incorporate it into your
fingerboard workout at a basic level.
I think that will hopefully like help your climbing.
Um, it's just like, um, and then you can try and make it more
complex if it does work, you know, periodize etc.
But to begin with, and especially for most people that might be listening,
um, I think that's the, that's the best way of doing it.
If that's kind of what I used to do.
And I know it kind of works with, um, uh, so I always, I kind of got to know
how my index was weak because I could do like back three, one arm that hangs
fine on the 20 mil edge, but front three was like this pipe dream (???).
And then it's so funny when I was like, let the Jim could do front three half
crimp when I'm dead hands.
Cause I thought this was like some awesome, amazing.
Well, it is for me, like, it's just incredible to, I don't think that
strength of me would be hard to work on.
It would take me a long time.
I would, you know, and that's what people should think about this as well.
Like this isn't a goal for four weeks.
This is a goal for like two years.
You're not going to up your finger by 10 kilos of pull in like four weeks of
training, but what I will say, you could get two or three kilos pretty quick.

SD:
Okay.
Well, let me ask you this.
I mean, do you have any recommendations for me as far as the actual protocol
goes, you know, if I'm going to have a session where I focus on bird beak on
the back two and then the front two in a crimp, um, edge size, you know,
should I do this on pockets or should I just do the two fingers on a flat edge?
Does edge size matter?
Any thoughts on training style protocols?
Yeah.

DV: 
Um, so basically to keep it quite simple, slot it into the peak of the session.
So your warmup and you, you know, your, your middle and end
third, just keep exactly the same.
So likely to be, you know, pyramiding up four finger dead
hangs and stuff like that in the fresh part of your session.
So I would split that apart as being like, um, front burner and back burner.
If you wanted to just stick them on the back burner, shove them in
at the end of the session, but make sure you're still fresh.
But if you want to make this a priority and target it, put it in the middle
of the pyramid, in the middle of the session, and I would say, keep it on
an edge size, which you're going to be hitting on the routes that you're
failing on and on the board problems that you're failing on.
So that's likely to be 20 mil or less.
And what you want to do is just take the weight off until it works.
If you're going to be doing it on the fingerboard or put the weight on until
you get to the right level of stimulation, if you're lifting off the ground.
And the key thing is just making sure that that feeling is the same.
So if it's on a pocket, that's fine.
Like it, it, it might benefit you more like your pinkies like
sneaky and likes to roll out sideways.
The pockets can stop that.
And that's why pockets are just nicer to train on per pockets because
they stop your fingers rolling laterally.
Um, but the, you might want to do it on an edge, just if it's more convenient.
And, um, it's again, it's just what, just focus on that feeling
and trying to copy and paste it.
And then in terms of the level, there's two things you need to be really
careful on with splitting grips, not going high for quite a long
time in terms of close to max.
So I would do at least three to four weeks of like, just making sure
that everything's happy base level.
You know, like you're splitting and you're, you're, you're stressing
your, um, cut by sheath (???) in ways that it might not have experienced.
Like hardly ever.
Um, the other cool thing about training grip like this is when you hit like a
back to your pocket outside or something, you can just yard on them.
I have this like a famous 8B+ in the UK called moonlight, and I could just
pinky mono the start hold and just yard off the pinky mono because he used
to mono, but you can't get for a bloke.
He can't really get any of the fingering, um, just like weird
problems like that over the years.
There's a cool, 8A, uh, band crag in the peak called "Crack David".
And there's a, I did this like variation of it called "Riverdance".
And I remember, um, I think that was with Ned and you just sort of
rolled into this pocket, but it was like this square pocket, but it was like
perfect back two, and, uh, it just fits so well and all the other fingers because you were crossing through.
It was quite tweaky to put any of the other fingers in.
And it was too small, essentially.
So sometimes you just find the hold outdoors that just fits and you could,
then you just do the problem because you're used to training in that way.
But it's like a weird side spin off of this method.
Um, but what I would say for the training is just make sure that
levels a nice body weight, which just gets the message through,
build that foundation.
And then when you feel ready, you can just push that into some like
slightly higher load, lower reps, just to try and sharpen it up.
But what I would say nowadays is don't go to max on it.
Just put it back into the grip that you want it to apply to, which is for you
would be half crimp and then hit that, you know, like in the way that you
you've been hitting it now.
And then hopefully you'll just have like a bit better stimulate.
Every finger will kind of know its job a bit better.
It'll stop trying to like, you know, share out the load and things in the
way that it's doing at the minute.
Hopefully things will just feel a bit more sparky in the way that
you can crush through them.

SD:
That's fascinating.
So it's almost like, you know, I'm going to isolate these different
finger combinations just to really wake them up just to wake the fingers up.
And then once they feel awake and they feel like they're firing a little
better, going back to four finger training to really pull hard.
Is that right?


DV:
Yeah.
Yeah.
And some of it's like, um, some of it won't apply.
Like you'll get gains when you split, which will just be your sheath
adaption, like learning how to bring the other fingers into play.
Um, but some of it applies really well.
And I think it, it is a method that, that does work, but again, it's
just one way of going about it.
Like, um, you could, you could never lots people never trained like this
and they just, um, you can still see gains, but I do feel like it
is the blunderbuss and rifle.
Like it's that they're just lucky.
Like they've hit the target and they've, they've hit it in a way
that has like enabled progression.
Um, but, and especially when I've looked at other sports, it's kind of
confirmed it to me in the last few years.
So I look at arm wrestling and how they break the wrist down and how
little climbers ever talk about wrists.
And, uh, and yeah, it's like, it's the be all and end all of arm wrestling.
Um, but what's interesting is, uh, like they never talk about fingertips.
I've said a bit on the lattice podcast and, um, I've never heard them
mentioned the FDP tendon or the FDS tendon or stuff like that.
So it's really interesting.
Like what is meaningful for a sport?
They focus in on, they break down and you get this fascinating knowledge.
And I feel like a lot of good climbers at the minute that are onto that
are stealing from arm wrestling.
And, uh, and then the same goes for like grip.
Um, I mean, you've had Eve Gravel on and, um, there's another climber
that's a really fascinating crossover.
Who's been on lattice as well.
Tana, um, who's, um, again, like phenomenal grip athlete and
was a really good rock climber.
So there's these, there's these nice, um, human examples at the
minute of like crossover and ways of doing things for myself.
I'm like, I'm still all about the rock and just trying to
solve problems near my house.
Um, I'm basically a local doctor.
Um, I've been a little bit, but really I don't, I don't travel the loads.
Um, so like stuff I can drive to in Europe is usually my father.
Like I've been around a bit, like I've been up Norway through, uh, went with
Michele Caminati to Italy and stuff.
I haven't really been in Switzerland much.
Actually.
That's probably one of my weakest areas that I've in terms of visiting, but I've
got, um, to know Font really well in the last, um, kind of five or six years.
I wish I'd kind of got a Font sooner.
Cause I love my favorite style of climbing.
Sandstone, because it has the whole subtlety, which all this podcast has been
about, like robotic numbers and stuff Font just destroys that it's just like, it just
says, Oh yeah, you've come with all your, your benchmarks and stuff like this.
But, you know, have like a big 6B+ like the Marga at East cities (???) and
like, you know, just do it first try go on, you know, 6B+, but you know, there are very, very good
climbers that spent a long time on it.
But I love that style of climbing.
I'm very lucky in that Northumberland in my local area is full of Font-style
sandstone.
So when I go to Font, it's like a busman's holiday.
I'm just like, Oh yeah, I know.
I know this game.
Uh, it's just, there's more of it and it's way better.
Um, uh, yeah, it's a magical place, um, for me for climbing.
Um, I think we're very lucky as Brits to have it so nearby and what's lovely
like the crossover there.
So just meeting people from other, other areas and stuff.
One of my best trips to Font was, uh, I met Tim Doyle from school on issues
that proper dark costs probably shouldn't even mention, but yeah, it was
fascinating to see Tim's approach to climbing and just how parallel it was.
Like even the shoes he had in his bag and the fact that when you do a lot of
developing, you learn what heels work for what aspects, like you have your
catch heels, your sort of notch heels, your surface area heels.
And he even had like the kind of breakdown for those and also the
different toes and things like shoes.
You, you look at totally differently when you've done a lot of developing, I
feel than when you're like, just thinking about what shoe to buy for the gym or
whatever, you know, like we, we deliberately sniff out, yeah, what works
for what rock type and what aspects.
So it was cool.
Like even just to look at us, but like we were on "Jewel" and, um, yeah, I could
just like know what shoe to wear because I could like cross equivalent
it from what they were wearing.
Yeah.
It's so like, that's great.
That's the magic of climbing.

SD:
Do you want to talk about wrists?
I mean, I have some questions about wrist strength, because I thought that
was another area from our first conversation and from hearing you talk
with Tom and lattice that really stood out to me, um, I'd be interested in that,
but yeah, how are you feeling?
And is there anything else that you want to talk about with the finger test
that we haven't covered before we move on?

DV:
Yeah, probably 20 minutes to just hit me with, uh, I mean, I think we've
covered the finger test pretty well without kind of going, getting a bit
more half crimped data and, um, no, I reckon like, I think it just over
complicate things.
I think there are other things to chat about in there, but there's, there's
such good low hanging fruit there.
And that's where I kind of feel like that kind of diagnostics is best, like
trying to pick out all the vagaries and that and train from it, it's probably
too reductive and board climbing and climbing is just such a mishmash of
different things.
Um, but what I would say is, uh, I guess to, to stress on that finally, um,
the point of, it's the beginning point of a lot of our contact in climbing, but
it, it's, um, because it connects to everything else, which I can segue into
wrists.
Uh, I feel like it has a knock on effect.
So if you can't high angle crimp and you're not strong to get in the back of
the hold, you're not going to be able to pull out on the hold.
If you can't pull out on the hold, you're not going to be able to move
slowly above the hold .
So hopefully this makes sense to people like it.
It's just physics.
Like if you can't access the incut well and stabilize it as you move above it,
you're going to move quicker.
If you're going to move quicker, you're going to have to capture that load when
you hit, whatever you're going to and stop it.
And you either stop that by being good at swinging and cutting loose all the
time and having like a grip position that doesn't fail, or you're going to, um,
lean a rinse some body tension and just transfer the weight into your feet and
through your core and like do loads of little foot moves and get a little heel
on and, you know, like it has such a knock on effect, but that's also why
these things are so hard to track down.
So I think diagnostics great for just picking up on the black holes, but
unfortunately they, they won't help people's training if the hardest part is
then like getting the brain to fill that in.
Cause the reason why we develop these things and these styles is just like
everyone has their own way of moving and reprogramming, especially as you get
older is a case of old dog and new tricks.
Like it, it just takes a bit more of a shunt to kind of get the brain to, um,
to do it, but luckily it can be done and that I'm gradually, uh, and I really
enjoy that, like I'm, I'm very similar to, um, Ned's philosophy of thinking
that I really enjoy training my weaknesses and not my strengths.
I was thinking about this the other day and I think I could do a lot better if I
just train my strengths for sandstone because I think like, you know, I'm like
six foot odd, um, with, uh, I've only got like six foot two span though, but, um,
the height, because when you're compressing, you're often on a diagonal
and my span works out.
I've never really like not been able to span anything.
There's been a few times in Font I've been close, but I've got up to stuff like end of me climbing by just
like relaxing my shoulders and just getting, getting the fun in.
But, um, but yeah, like if I trained, I've been trying to think like how I
would train my strengths for sandstone and if I should play around with that.
But I just think I enjoy training my weaknesses, um, because for me, it's
more fun, it's like the low hanging fruit or as training your strengths.
Some climbers do it brilliantly and it's the best way to get up the grades, but
then you come into the whole philosophy of like, what are you climbing for?
Are you climbing for that personal satisfaction and, and a feeling of moving
over a rock or are you climbing to sort of prove something to yourself and other
people, you know, and it's not often never black and white.
It's like a, it's a blend, isn't it?
But, um, uh, I've spent so long, um, it's only been literally in the last two
years, I've had anything really to go out in the lakes of substance, thanks to
Aidan and now, but most of the things in the lakes are, um, projects that are in
fact, nearly all of them as projects that are either the standups mine or, um,
something I've had a relationship with in the past and I've known about, cause
it's really hard finding stuff.
You could talk to a whole podcast on how bloody hard it is finding rocks, but,
um, it's, uh, it's, so I've got those to go out now, but in Northumberland, I
don't, there hasn't been the kind of next generation development of kind of put up
things.
Um, it's still mostly me and the old boys rattling around over there and doing new
stuff.
So it's nice cause I have loads of projects to myself, but it's rubbish in
I just don't have like that shunt from the next generation, um, which will
likely come like, I'm sure, like there's so many good climbers popping up now
and Will Bosi and Aiden and the both quite semi local to the, um, in that
Aidan's got his band now and, um, Will is from Edinburgh when he's up near his
family.
And actually that's only an hour down to where all those projects are.
So it's very likely in the next couple of years that the hard stuff will start
going up.
So if I want to take the county, I've got one dyno left (???) pretty much
the problem with Chris and, uh, I haven't done it and it, it gave me a finger
injury to dyno it from mono and, um, I need to get that done.
And if I could get, if I can be asked to get that done, I think that's my only
window.
Cause I think when those boys get started, they'll be like, I'll be out of
the game, but...


SD:
"tick is the county"
I love that.

DV:
But there's like, there's not that many great problems there.
There's probably only, uh, 90 at the minute or something.

SD:
Sounds like a lot to me.
That's awesome.

DV:
Like we can be semi proud of it, but it's like 300.

SD:
Okay.
We've got about 15 minutes left.
Let's, uh, let's dive into the wrist training.
The first time you and I talked, you started by giving me a tour of your
training room here and I'm like staring at this beautiful climbing board behind
you, and I'm tempted to ask about that, but we can save that for, for round two.
Um, if you're up for that, but just pretend it's a cliff and climb, but yeah,
so you showed me all, you showed me your training setup and you showed me your
collection of grip implements and you said grip is like my staple food.
It's like the thing that you do all the time.
And so I'm really curious, very simply.
I mean, I know I asked about wrist training and that can certainly be your
answer or it can be connected to it, but what are most climbers neglecting?
And I'm curious if you had to just give every climber listening to this one
exercise to work on either for general grip training that translates to climbing
in your experience or specifically for targeting their wrist strength for climbing.
Is there anything that comes to mind?
Or is that even the right question to ask?

DV:
No, that's pretty good.
Um, I mean, like one arm half crimp dead hang would be like your great,
uh, staple that it just were.

SD:
Huh.
I was not expecting that answer.
That's interesting.
Um, you think that gets the wrist?

DV:
No, not the wrist at all, but like just in terms of like, if you were on
about one thing to train or whatever.

SD
Okay.
Gotcha.
Gotcha.

DV:
I just think it's a lot of basis, but in terms of the wrist, um, the real
interesting thing now is like, um, indoor and outdoor climbing, uh, kind
of diverging and, um, indoor climbing still isn't hitting the wrist with
a lot of indoor climbing holds.
They're making all these big, uh, fiberglass holds, but they keep
putting the hold at the front.
Because it's more interesting if you like curve it and carve the pinch
and things, and they're not putting the hold over the back, like the
Font slopers hit you or some of those granite curves.
Um, like, uh, I'm trying to think of what areas have kind of like, you
see, slopers are a little bit niche depending on where you live.
Like if you live in the sands, you know, the sandstone in states got
loads of hard elements of that style.
Um, but I would imagine, I mean, I've only climbed a couple of areas in
America, but, um, yeah, like, uh, Joe's Valley or something.
It, you could probably play like spot the sloper and not do very well.
Like it's an area with a crap ton of crimps and pockets and a true slope,
like wrist bent sloper, it's just not that applicable.
Whereas say like, um, in Little Cottonwood, which if you're a Salt
Lake local, it's going to be on your same sort of hit this where you want to go.
Um, that's that, is it "Bear Claw Traverse" or something like that 8A+?
I think I did that on my first day in America, but, um, just like loads of
slopers, uh, so be traverse in the main area where um copperhead and stuff is.
And, uh, it's, it's got something to do with, uh, yeah, I don't know that one.
Yeah.
Anyway.
Um, yeah.
Granite it's full of slopers if, um, if you want to go looking for them.
Uh, so whereas, yeah, so indoor to outdoors, I think this is where
people will see a big hole.
And again, like we've talked a bit about black hole in training.
So if you just climb in the gym, you get good in the gym, you get good on
the board, you get flicky and then you suddenly try and squeeze something
outdoors with a massively bent wrist.
You're going to quickly realize that that thing's going to
fail within one or two goes.
You probably get a load of wrist ache.
You might get a clunky wrist and then you just come away being a bit like,
Oh, that was a battle.
Um, whereas if you've trained your wrist and you've like, if you had an arm
wrestlers level of wrist strength, you'd just be like, Oh, that's total joke.
So, um, yeah, climbers can be pretty bad at overlooking wrist strength.
And I don't know many climbers that really target it.
It's a bit niche, but we had, um, I just do it for the fun of it really.
And, um, it doesn't apply it again.
It's total junk.
It doesn't work in the lakes on six million cut crimps.
Um, what I would say is don't overlook the extenses and stabilizing the wrist
when it's in the extensive position, which again, like there's a divergence
between climbing and arm wrestling because they never train their wrist
back really, because essentially you're looking at a loss, so you never
really want your risk to go back.
But in climbing, we climb all pretty much all board climbing is like neutral
or extensive, like barely ever get on your flexes, but pretty much all 
sandstone curvy squeezing or gritstone curvy squeezing is on your flexors.
Like if you're going around the curve, your wrist is flexed slightly.
Whenever it's flexed, it's activated.
And when it's activated, it's got a pull pretty hard.
And then you get into stabilization of pronation and supination and like your
paddle on a sloper and how that paddle works.
And, um, so hopefully that'll like explain things to people a bit as to
maybe why it could be a priority priority, but I really feel like it'll just
depend on where you live and because if you're sport climbing as well and
things and trad climbing, I just don't think you need it.
I think, I think it, you'll occasionally hit like a break or something that
might be slopey and it sucks if you're pumped because you just fall off like
slopers plus pump are like horrendous.
Aren't they?
If you've been to those sport climbing areas that have like, there's a few
routes in Australia and things that are a bit like that, that's when you kind
of get that vomit pump rather than the, you know, just the forearm pump.
Um, but yeah, when, uh, it'll, it just depends on where you live.
And, and again, like indoors, it does help.
There's a lot of other weird wrist strengths and actually like, um, Guppy
strengths on volumes is way more beneficial in comps than like your sloper strength.

SD
What strength say that word again?

DV
Guppy.
Oh yeah.
That's another one that gets, uh, 

SD:
what does that mean?

DV:
So like, you know, loads of volumes are triangles and you essentially just flex
your, uh, and your, your, um, 

SD:
it's like a meat wrap grip or something like that.
Meat wrap where you're like squeezing between your palm and your fingers.
Yeah.


DV:
Yeah.
And yeah, and you often have a lot of wrist flexion, but that's
actually how I injured my arm.
Uh, was on a downhill volume meat wrap and I was like pulling really
hard, making up an element in the gym.
And, uh, and I'd just been there too long.
I've been there like three hours.
Um, my wife and I had like the odd, one of these rare days
where we didn't have enough kids.
And, uh, I forgot that I was massively unconditioned.
And, uh, and yeah, I just tweaked it, but it's taken ages to, to fix.
And I was probably tired from playing around with doing silly wrist things as
well.
Uh, but yeah, those, those guppies or meat wraps on volumes can be really
pinky based if you hit them on the outside or index based and that's
massively pronator and supinator, um, dependent.
And then in terms of deviation and what an arm wrestler would call the riser,
which is, uh, it's like abduction and adoption, isn't it?
of you wrist, but, um, yeah, those are all things that people might want to
pay attention to if you wanting to work on that strength for comps.
And, um, cause again, like it's non-existent in fingerboarding,
non-existent in board climbing, but it's hugely important in competitions nowadays.
Um, it's tough, almost non-existent outdoors, like where are triangles, like I
can, I can name a few problems, like RSA cave is actually quite triangular in Scotland
that has a lot of Dave MacLeod... problems... on like a really
cool 8A, a, there called "triangulation".

SD:
There you go.

DV:
Um, there's like, yeah, it's just full of like, but that has quite a few
in that indoor style, but like, as a rule, they're just super
rare to find that feature.

SD
Right, right.


DV:
There's another 8B I did at free solo (???) actually, if you want to, I
quite like playing the, think of the exceptions to the rule game. That has triangular
volume copies on, um, but, um, yeah.
And then, and again, like, uh, that's just got some weirdness that have like
knee bars and guppies, and that was enough for like teenage Aiden to get a bit
confused, eat it up nowadays, but, um, but yeah, it was, it's, it just shows
that multifactorial element in climbing.
Um, but again, like some people have mastered that, you know, like nobody
can mention knee bars without Dave Graham.
And you just think like that.
And some of these, uh, sport climbers now as well, next level.
Applying that I'm kind of all for that.
There's been quite a few debates in British climbing about, you know, pads
on no pads, knee bars on no knee bars and stuff just seems a bit silly to me.
Cause there's so much rock in the world.
And it's only when, if you're precious about one route and you tried really
hard and you did it without knee bar, it feels crappy when someone comes and does
it, but if you look at the whole picture, it's just crazy to think like there are
so many climbs in the world that you can't get a knee bar on.
Then it's a valid technique.
It's an, it's actually quite fun.
Like I've got a lot of respect for that technique.
Um, like I hate it sometimes for like the awkwardness of it.
Like you do, it does restrict your movement a little bit.
If you're not expert on how to apply the pad and things, but, um, it's, uh, it's
an art, you know, I can respect any, anything like that.

SD:
It is.
I just was thinking about, um, I've done quite a lot of knee barring and
I'm sure I'm not an expert at it, but I've done a fair bit of it.
And I was just immediately when you said that, I was, I was just thinking
about a route that I climbed a couple of years ago, I think it was 
an 8a route and, uh, I, it was like a knee bar scum under a roof, and then you
have to extend and like dead point a crimp above that, and it was, I've, I've
never before or since done a move like this, where it was all about locking in
the lower body below the waist and making sure that you didn't move at all.
Cause if you moved the knee bar would come out and then generating and doing
a dynamic dead point with your upper body, you know, it was so bizarre
and just getting that per, and it was, it was absolutely tipped out for me.
Like I, I didn't have any margin.
I had to be at full extension to latch the crimp and it was just so weird.
You know, it's like everything in your, in your previous experience is telling
you to generate through the legs and the hips, um, but just to isolate those
two things and separate them and compartmentalize them like that.
I mean, it took me so many tries to get the hang of this move and it's just,
yeah, it's just totally different, but really fun.

DV:
That's like a crunch punch or something, isn't it?
Flopping your upper body towards the rock.
Yeah.
That's, I mean, exactly like what the movement's just brilliant
in climbing, isn't it sometimes?
to miss out on that would be a shame for me, but like I respect people who
don't do it because I like seeing power and climbing as well and just like brute
force, but there's a place for both of them, you know, and I think it's pretty
much that's been and gone now, like new bars look like that.
They're pretty much here to stay.
I'm seeing them on all the heart problems and routes.
It seems like that's been the big boom in sport climbing.
Actually.
It isn't like we've all got way stronger in the last 10 years.
We just worked out how it rests probably.
And then stuck the difficulty on, just to like massively overgeneralizing.

SD:
Well, Dan, I've, I got a bunch of listener questions for you and for people
listening, thank you guys, everyone who submitted questions.
A lot of them were around high angle crimps, different grip positions, how
that's impacted your own climbing to focus on high angle crimps and these
different things, what you learned from Aiden, et cetera.
So I think we covered pretty much, I think we covered most of them.
We definitely didn't get to all of them.
And for you guys that submitted questions, I'll save your questions
for our next conversation and hopefully we can get into more of those.
But I have two questions here that I want to ask you before I let you go.
And they're a little bit more general.
They're just looking back at your own climbing journey, given the degree to
which you think about all this stuff and all these different chapters you've
had in, you know, this, this blunderbuss/rifle thing, and really
focusing in on specific things.
What do you wish you had started doing earlier, if anything?


DV: 
Forming an athletic physique to base the foundation on, that's
like really easy to answer actually.
Um, so I, but then what's weird, cause like you're asking for history to be
different, but, um, cause climbing was like a bit more grunge, garage-based
DIY boards and training was a bit more underground, something you
whispered between your mates.
So to go from that to like full blown, like, Oh, I'm going to like hit the
gym and develop a really balanced physique and get, and
then tailor it to climbing.
Would be like, just mental to think of doing that in the 2000s.
Whereas now I think that's what the kids are doing to get the next level up
because ultimately the pitfall of just going down the road of boards and
fingerboards, which I think I, I was lucky in that I guessed that pretty
well in my late teens and, um, for myself, uh, I guess not regardless of
grades, like it's just given me the option of basically hoovering up a lot
of blank rock and projects, um, and managing to solve those puzzles, which
is really satisfying and also being able to kind of repeat a lot of past
test pieces in the UK.
Um, uh, and, and so like, I've kind of got out of climbing a lot of what I
wanted and I feel like I've managed to, I I'm really lucky in that I've had
the satisfaction, the personal satisfaction, which can only ever be for
oneself in that I feel like there's been a few times where I've managed to
climb things on rocks that have been very close to what I could possibly
achieve, um, at that particular moment in time.
Now those styles have changed over the years, but I could definitely
have climbed harder with more of that athletic approach, but would I change it?
Um, like I'm, I'm glad I got into bouldering at a time when, you know,
like 2002, 2003 was when I started putting up problems outside in my late
teens and that really feels like the boom time of bouldering, you know,
like what was Bishop like then?
And, you know, Fred Nicole was just starting to explore those areas.
And, uh, you know, look, I've been lucky enough to meet some
over the years who, yeah, he flew through Bishop around that time and
did that "Goldfish Trombone" and things.
Um, but yeah, and then like, yeah, the "Mandala" and "Spectra" and things
of, they were also inspiring at that time.
And I wasn't anywhere near that level in those days, but, um, just to, uh,
to have been around bouldering and to have been like, even just sort of
an observer at that time, I feel like that has been such a cool period of
bouldering from like those days to where it is now has really felt like a, a
really interesting thing to have been involved with, um, so yeah, like, uh,
but yeah, I'll, I'll stop rubbing.
Yeah.
More of an athlete.

SD:
And then, uh, what do you think you would need to focus on to get
to the next level for yourself?
Whether that's V15 or  some specific boulder that you want to do.
That seems like the next level boulder for you personally.

DV:
Yeah, I think, um, I'd be happy just climbing, um, like for me, uh, I'm, I'm
very, I just like see British grading and grades in general, in terms of like,
uh, the amount of times I've climbed like 8B second go or 8B+, 
like the Alchemist in under an hour in Font, and then spent like,
I'll just spend like three years on something in the UK (smth 8B+), because I can't
touch the 8C's in my County because the Gaskin doesn't, um, I couldn't
really like. 
I give loads of shit about training and strength and like, like
you can measure a deadhang.
So I'd love to get my, um, one arm less than 20 mil drag up to cool.
Like maybe I should go for 110 kilo total or, um, I'd like to, um, I've
never done one five nine, but God doing one five eight was like the most
useless part of camp.
You're like, I think campusing, campusing is, brilliant on hold and
campusing problems is amazing, but I think campus boarding, uh, it's a good
way to get loads of movement and grams that you are never going to use outside.
And most people that are brilliant at campusing and body that they, they don't
tend to be the best movers.
Um, so like, yeah, those feats of strength, I'd love to work towards, I guess
you can train those in the house, but, um, outdoors I'd be chuffed if I could
repeat a bunch of Aiden stuff locally in the lakes, like there's a bunch of
kind of 8B+/8C ish problems in the lakes, which I would love to do.
So like, um, and a lot of them has been projects that I've left and I know I can
do them like, um, Leopold said, I've done all the moves and that's like an i see
Aiden did just earlier this year.
The problem for me is I just get distracted.
I'm very motivated by just having a nice day out climbing and being out in nature.
So if the conditions are better and, and I get really sucked into lines, like we
haven't really chatted about highballs and stuff, but if there's a bigger, better
line, I'll just go for that.
It doesn't matter if it's easier.
Like I love the aesthetics and the purity of like the challenge.
And, um, that's why, so I'll spend like days stomping around trying to find like
a big independent line to get inspired by.
So I've got one lined up for this winter, actually, I've got time on the grit.
I don't really care if people do it before me now as well.
Um, but I would love to do that.
Uh, so, and then that for me would be like another line on the grit that I would
just be like super inspired to take off into the memory banks with me.
Um, whereas yeah, with, with grades, I just get like frustrated just for
the personal British history and I love where we are now with the sport with it.
But yeah, compared to the little bit of climbing that I've done abroad and
things like, I think a lot of I'm sort of, yeah, um, it's for me, it's just like
wicked to see, um, the talent that we've got coming through now and that are
traveling and stuff and people can just see kind of the, the British climate
seems pretty strong and healthy.
Um, but what matters to me is kind of that, um, I get quite, you know, it
doesn't matter to me about the grade.
If I've put a lot of effort into a climb outside, it's more about just
chatting to my peers and I'm really lucky in that a lot of my problems
are very well respected.
So between my, my problems in the lakes that Aiden's repeated, I feel like
they mean a lot to him.
Um, they weren't just like any old 8B+ or whatever.
Um, which is, you know, like that matters to me more than having a good
chat about the sequence and stuff.
Um, but, uh, yeah, so I would love, everybody wants to progress, but, um,
I think for me, yeah, I guess there's like, there's 8C in Font
I'd love to do that are on my list.
Yeah.
It's just time.
I don't think I've really got the time to like, I'd have to try and take
some pretty quickly, which I think I can do for like, I've picked so many
things quite quickly in Font.
Cause I've never had a trip longer than three weeks there.
So I'm used to doing stuff between one and two weeks.
I've had one-three week trip.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So I've had loads of two week trips, which if you know anything about, you
know, like if you get bad skin on your first two days, that's 50%
of your trip with bad skin.
So 

SD:
I'm right.
Or if it rains for the first week in Font.


DV:
Yeah.
Which was my last trip.
It was like, and, um, but I've been really lucky and I've had some great
weather trips over the years and stuff.
So I've got through a lot of what I wanted to do in Font.
Um, so actually, and I kind of worked my way up.
So I've only really got a lot of that harder stuff to do above
8B+ and above is where I've got a huge hole in like my Font resume.
So actually stuff, yeah.
Like the "Big Island", um, that's the last of the old black star
8-s I haven't ticked in Font.
I've done the rest of them.
Um, the, of the new black star 8-s, I've got a few more, but it's under eight, I
think, but again, that's a crap measurement because there's so many things that are
good in Font that have no stars.
And now I think I'm just looking at the new problems that have been put up like
Thomas Colin young and Oliver LeBreton, uh, amazing and inspiring that they're in
the forties and still doing incredible line.
Um, and then Guillaume Gaubert (???) and cool young developer in Font, um, very, very
inspiring stuff.
So, um, but I've got those to go and I've got the kind of the hard stuff.
So like "delirio sit" (???), I'd love to do, I kind of spotted that before.
And that's an 8C of, uh, Charles's, um, yeah, "Big Island".
I'd love to try.
So it's just like, if I get a trip and the weather's good and they're there, I'll,
I'll get stuck in, but I'll have to, I do need to kind of get, I mean, I'm in the
thick of it with like young kids and, um, and just general, like, you know, I'm
working with young kids and I'm doing my house at the minute.
I'm not like I'm playing the long game and, uh, but not by choice and, uh, yeah,
I think I've done, but I'm just happy.
Like if I can, I've been really happy with kind of a lot of these training
styles that I'm emulating from Aiden and things.
And, um, I just feel like maybe to demonstrate to people that would be it.
So that's partly why I would like to repeat those problems, but I feel like a
lot of the problems Aiden's done, they're a bit binary.
You can do them or you can't in the, a lot of them are so power based in
the fingers, especially that you tend to make them look easy-ish if you can do
them, if you can pass that bar, whereas, um, there aren't too many tricks.
Um, there are a few because he's done a few things so quickly.
It's just missed the best beta, but, um, yeah.
So there are inspiring lines in the lakes for me to work on, but yeah,
I'm just like, I'm quite, uh, easy come, easy go.
I love training and work on that.
But in terms of climbing, I just, um, I've, I value sort of
happiness over performance more.
So that just means going with my heart and what really inspires me.
I know that can be an 8A slab, a 7C+ or 8A mantle (??) because those are
like, if you've tried any British mantles, um, 8A mantle is pretty full on.
Um, I can't, 


SD:
I can't even imagine what that would feel like.
Yeah.


VD:
Yeah.
There's some sandbags in Britain.
I like stuff like, like, like Ned's, Ned Zeppelin or, um, we, we went to this
place called Hell's Mantle on the grit and that's still got some great projects.
Um, but I got, um, me and Ned and Dave Sutcliffe all went and we were just
missing Ben's Ben Bransby.
He's like one of the other best mantlers and, um, we would have had like the
dream team, but we had three or four that were pretty good.
And, um, Uh, again, like that was a bit mid summer, but I went back in really
good conditions and did this kind of like hybrid problem with a bit of hard
crimping and then like a 7C+ mantle that me and Ned did previously.
And, um, just like that, I find really inspiring because it's like a different
style and fun to work on.
And, um, so yeah, just local projects for me, it was motivating.
That's, um, uh, a sort of something that's would be like a big number
that's, um, gonna like turn heads.
Um, because that that's kind of, I mean, I'm lucky in that I'm in a low
pressure, I don't need to turn heads.
So I'm inclined to just go that way.

SD:
Well, awesome, man.
I think it's, uh, I've been greedy with you.
I think it's time for you to put your kids to bed, but I just want
to say, I really appreciate this.
This is so fun for me.
It's definitely super helpful for me.
I'm excited to take this advice and like you said, use it and apply it to myself
and, um, share the results with everyone listening and see what happens from it.
But yeah, I just, I really appreciate the time and for everyone listening, I still
have about a page of notes at least that we didn't even touch on.
So if you want, if you enjoyed this conversation, let us know.
And if you want to hear us talk about Dan's spray wall and how he thinks
about setting up a spray wall, his he's got one of the most unique
spray walls I've ever seen.
That's a teaser.
Um, so if you're curious about that, I was curious to hear about your time
management and what you focus your time on when you are limited on time.
Cause I was surprised to hear that you're not spending much time climbing
on your board because you're focused the little time that
you have on other priorities.
Um, if you want to hear us talk about outdoor tactics and finding
boulders and highball mindset, there's so much we could talk about.
So yeah, if you guys want that, let us know.
And, uh, hopefully we can, we can do a round two, but for now.
I appreciate you.
Thanks so much.


DV:
Yeah.
What was that?
But if I'm a boring bastard and people are sick of listening to me,
rub it on them.
Yeah.
I'm happy.
Yeah.
Just the crack on in silence.


SD:
There's, there's a lot of geeks out there, man.
I think people are going to be psyched, um, to test their fingers
and to, uh, get into this incut.
I'm sorry.
High angle, high angle crimp training.
I think it'll be great.
So, yeah.

DV:
Think, uh, yeah.
So just, and just, yeah, to finish for yourself.
I think the main thing, if anyone can take anything away from when you split
your grip up, just the main thing is making sure you just copy and paste
that when you break it apart to be as applicable as possible, and then you
should hit the, you should stimulate the right nerves and you should wake stuff
up and then when you can wake stuff up, you'll hit those parts that have been,
you know, a bit sleepy and everyone's got sleepy parts of that game, you know?
So, and, and you know what, we're not all going to end up at Font 9A-s, but what
I would say is surely everyone can get a bit more progression out of their
fingers if they find like the slack and sleepy parts and, and, um, what's
cool for you, especially with your middle finger is, um, that's like a
finger that can take a lot of load biologically, you know, it's the,
it's the big strong one.
So for you, I think it's something to do with like the way you've got into
climbing and a bit of like the way you sort of stimulate your grip and maybe
you just haven't had loads of dynamic, high impact load that's forced it to
sort of wake up a bit.
And I think that would be dangerous to just jump on, like, just be looking
around, like loading up like one arm.
I used to do this thing where I just could jump and drive campus runs on one
crazy to think I used to do that now.
Um, but, uh, yeah, so just capturing that feeling and making sure that that's
what you copy and paste onto your training, um, is the best way of, if
you're going to split your grip up and stuff, just try and do that.
And, uh, I'll leave it there because hopefully that's probably my best
takeaway point 


SD:
on that note though, maybe we should end with some goals for me.
So for the pinky open hand, I'm at 16 kilos.
I'm going to try to get up to 20, like you said, and then my middle finger in
a crimp position is currently at about 16 kilos, 16 and a half.
What's a good goal for me?
You think with that?
And I'm, I'm thinking long-term I'm thinking like over the next couple
of years, something to work towards.

DV:
Couple of years.
Okay.
A couple of years above 25 and shorter term, two to three kilo jump.
Okay.
In six months.
Okay.
Ish, but that's partly because I think there's something that, um, and that's
where, um, yeah, I feel like the middle should pick up more and it can certainly
handle that kind of load for your body weight and things like that.
So I feel, I feel like that's not too crazy.
And certainly that's the type of numbers you'll see on, um, stronger
boulderers in sort of the mid eight.
Um, is that kind of, if it's not on that finger, it will be on say the
pinky or something like that, you know, like the load will, you'll get there.
Um, so, and this is, this is why you see like 138% body weight scores and
things like that on some, uh, dead hangs and stuff, because like the pinky
will just take 40 kilos or something off 50 when it's things like that.
But, um, you know, it's all load displacement and stuff, but, um, yeah.
So for you 25 long, you know, like two years-ish goal and then pinky, I would say.
Cause that's flexed.
And then pinky, I would say open.
I would say, yeah, above 20 is that's a little bit harder.
You've got to be a bit more careful with the pinky and strain it as well.
A little bit easier than the middle.
I feel it's got less.
It hasn't got the same support that the middle house can't draw
from the other fingers as easily.
So it's only got the ring to pull on, which is genetically tied to anyway.
Um, so, uh, yeah, 20 kilos.
And then if you could get like, yeah, I would say that's a safe goal.
I wouldn't, I wouldn't say like how much above 22 would be like pushing things.
Um, but if you take that and you could apply that to half crimp, I think you've
just, what if you just bought yourself like, um, uh, maybe like 10 kilos of
body weight, which is probably going to be the difference between one arm
dead hanging and hopefully it'll be the difference between the main thing you
want is grip shouldn't be failing on most of those sort of 5.14s and up.
Right.
Um, uh, so yeah, that's the best way of looking at it.
I think it's like, what sort of load are you going to be putting through
your fingers on those routes and when, and how can you keep failure at bay?
But the thing I really shouldn't talk about is, uh, really climbing
fitness, power, stuff like that.
I can't, I can't help you there.
Just get like some person that's been climbing for like two days on routes
and they'll give you better advice.

SD:
This has been amazing, man.
I'm really excited to, uh, to integrate some of this stuff and I'll just be, I'll
just be grinding away with my finger training per usual, and I'll keep all you
guys posted, but thanks again, Dan.

DV:
Thanks for the chat.
Yeah.
It's been great fun, Steven.



SD outro:
Hey friends, just a couple of quick reminders for our viewers.
Just a couple of quick reminders for you before you go.
First things first, I put my training results from the finger strength test
that I did with Dan in the show notes for this episode.
So if you want to see my actual results, my numbers, how much I can lift with each
finger, you can download that from the website for the show notes page for this
episode, go to thenuggetclimbing.com and find my episode with Dan and you'll find
it there in the show notes.
Also, before you go, don't forget to check out Rhino Skin Solutions.
Whether you have dry glassy skin or sweaty skin and have trouble keeping
chalk on your hands, Rhino Skin Solutions has products that are designed just for
you and your skin type.
Check them out at rhinoskinsolutions.com and use code NUGGET at checkout for
20% off your next order.
Also be sure to check out the Arc'teryx film Free As Can Be.
I watched it.
I loved it.
And if you love climbing, I'm sure you'll dig it too.
Head over to YouTube and search for Arc'teryx free as can be, or use the
direct link right there in your podcast app to watch the full 31 minute film for
free.
And finally, don't forget to check out the Grasshopper board.
Check them out on Instagram at grasshopperclimbing or visit
grasshopperclimbing.com to find out where you can find a board near you to try
it out for yourself.
Tell them I sent you and when you're ready to get your very own grasshopper
board, you can save big money on your order.
And that is it, my friends.
Thank you so much for listening to the very end.
I really appreciate you guys for tuning in week after week and for supporting the
podcast, either with your dollars or by listening and sharing it with your
friends.
It means a lot to me.
If you haven't yet, I would love it.
If you could leave us a review on Apple podcasts or a quick rating on Spotify,
that definitely helps out the show as well and only takes a second.
Once again, I hope you found something valuable in this conversation.
Best of luck with your finger testing and training.
I hope you guys have an amazing week and we will see you next time.
